2. Aroma characteristics
a. Olfactory sensations (vanilla, fruity, ﬂoral, skunky)
b. Nasal feeling factors (cool, pungent)
3. Flavor characteristics
a. Olfactory sensations (vanilla, fruity, ﬂoral, chocolate, skunky, rancid)
b. Taste sensations (salty, sweet, sour, bitter)
c. Oral feeling factors (heat, cool, burn, astringent, metallic)
4. Oral texture characteristics (Brandt, Skinner, and Coleman 1963; Szczesniak 1963;
Szczesniak, Brandt, and Friedman 1963)
a. Mechanical parameters; reaction of the product to stress (hardness, viscosity,
deformation/fracturability)
b. Geometrical parameters, i.e., size, shape, and orientation of particles in the
product (gritty, grainy, ﬂaky, stringy)
c. Fat/moisture parameters, i.e., presence, release and adsorption of fat, oil, or
water (oily, greasy, juicy, moist, wet)
5. Skinfeel characteristics (Schwartz 1975; Civille and Dus 1991; ASTM 1997a)
a. Mechanical parameters; reaction of the product to stress (thickness, ease to
spread, slipperiness, denseness)
b. Geometrical parameters, i.e., size, shape, and orientation of particles in
product or on skin after use (gritty, foamy, ﬂaky)
c. Fat/moisture parameters, i.e., presence, release, and absorption of fat, oil, or
water (greasy, oily, dry, wet)
d. Appearance parameters; visual changes during product use (gloss,
whitening, peaking)
6. Texture/handfeel of woven and nonwoven fabrics (Civille and Dus 1990)
a. Mechanical properties; reaction to stress (stiffness, force to compress or
stretch, resilience)
b. Geometrical properties, i.e., size, shape, and orientation of particles (gritty,
bumpy, grainy, ribbed, fuzzy)
c. Moisture properties; presence and absorption of moisture (dry, wet, oily,
absorbent).
Again, the keys to the validity and reliability of descriptive analysis testing are:
† Terms based on a thorough understanding of the technical and physiological
principles of ﬂavor or texture or appearance;
† Thorough training of all panelists to fully understand the terms in the same way
and to apply them in the same way; and
† Use of for terminology (see Chapter 11, Appendix 11.2) to ensure consistent
application of the carrier and descriptive terms to a perception.
10.3.2
Intensity: The Quantitative Aspect
The intensity, or quantitative aspect, of descriptive analysis etc. expresses the degree to
which each of the characteristics (terms, qualitative components) is present. This is
expressed by the assignment of some value along a measurement scale.
Descriptive Analysis Techniques
175
