As a rule of thumb, a statistically signiﬁcant result at
† An a-risk of 10–5% (0.10–0.05) indicates moderate evidence that a difference
is apparent
† An a-risk of 5–1% (0.05–0.01) indicates strong evidence that a difference
is apparent
† An a-risk of 1–0.1% (0.01–0.001) indicates very strong evidence that a difference
is apparent
† An a-risk below 0.1% (!0.001) indicates extremely strong evidence that a
difference is apparent
For b-risks, the strength of the evidence that a difference is not apparent is assessed
using the same criteria as above (substituting “is not apparent” for “is apparent”).
The maximum allowable proportion of distinguishers, pd, falls into three ranges:
† pd!25% represent small values
† 25%!pd!35% represent medium-sized values
† pdO35% represent large values
6.3
Triangle Test
The section on the Triangle test (ASTM 2004; ISO 2004c), being the ﬁrst in this book, is
rather complex and includes many details which (1) all sensory analysts should know, (2)
are common to many methods, and (3) are therefore omitted in subsequent methods. The
application of the uniﬁed approach is described in Example 6.3 and Example 6.4.
6.3.1
Scope and Application
Use this method when the test objective is to determine whether a sensory difference exists
between two products. This method is particularly useful in situations where treatment
effects may have produced product changes that cannot be characterized simply by one or
two attributes. Although it is statistically more efﬁcient than the paired comparison and
duo–trio methods, the triangle test has limited use with products that involve sensory
fatigue, carryover, or adaptation, and with subjects who ﬁnd testing three samples too
confusing. This method is effective in certain situations:
1. To determine whether product differences result from a change in ingredients,
processing, packaging, or storage
2. To determine whether an overall difference exists, where no speciﬁc attribute(s)
can be identiﬁed as having been affected
3. To select and monitor panelists for ability to discriminate given differences
6.3.2
Principle of the Test
Present to each subject three coded samples. Instruct subjects that two samples are iden-
tical and one is different (or odd). Ask the subjects to taste (feel, examine) each product
Overall Difference Tests: Triangle Test
65
