appropriately, the block effects can be separated from the treatment effects and from the
experimental error, thus providing “clean” reads of the treatment effects while simul-
taneously reducing the unexplained variability in the study.
In more familiar terms, in sensory tests, the experimental material is the large group of
evaluations performed by the judges. The evaluations are typically arranged into blocks
according to judge, in recognition of the fact that, due to differing thresholds for instance,
judges may use different parts of the rating scale to express their perceptions. It is assumed
that the size of the perceived difference between any two samples is the same from judge
to judge. Within each judge (i.e., block) a single evaluation is the experimental unit. The
treatments, which can be thought of as products at this point, must be independently
applied at each evaluation. This is accomplished through such techniques as randomized
orders of presentation, sequential monadic presentations, and wash-out periods of suf-
ﬁcient duration to allow the respondent to return to some baseline level of perception
(constant for all evaluations).
13.5.2.1
Completely Randomized Designs
The simplest blocking structure is the completely randomized design (CRD). In a CRD, all
of the experimental material is homogeneous; i.e., a CRD consists of one large block of
experimental units. CRDs are used, for example, when a single product is being evaluated
at several locations by distinct groups of respondents (e.g., a monadic, multicity consumer
test). In such cases, the signiﬁcance of the differences due to location is determined in light
of the variability that occurs within each location.
The overall liking data in Table 13.11 conform to a CRD. The box-and-whisker
plots presented in Figure 13.1 and the conﬁdence intervals in Figure 13.5 suggest
that some city-to-city differences may exist. The average liking response can be used to
summarize city-to-city differences. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) is used to determine if
the observed differences in average liking are statistically signiﬁcant. The ANOVA table
for these data is presented in Table 13.10.
The F-ratio for cities in Table 13.10 is highly signiﬁcant (F0.01,3,116Z3.95), indicating that
at least some of the observed differences among cities are real. To determine which of the
averages are signiﬁcantly different, another statistical method called a multiple comparisons
procedure must be applied. For the present example, the multiple comparison technique
called Fisher’s least signiﬁcant difference (LSD) is used. In general, the LSD value used to
compare two averages, xi and xj, is calculated as
LSDa Z ta=2;dfE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
MSE
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1=niÞ Cð1=njÞ
q
;
(13.11)
where ta=2;dfE is the upper-a/2 critical value of a t-distribution with dfE degrees of freedom
(i.e., the degrees of freedom for error from the ANOVA), MSE is the mean square for error
TABLE 13.10
ANOVA Table for a Completely Randomized Design for the Multicity
Consumer Test Data in Table 13.1
Source of
Variability
Degrees of
freedom
Sum of
Squares
Mean
Square
F
Total
119
541.56
City
3
283.34
94.45
42.43
Error
116
258.22
2.23
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 13
340
