look for insights within smaller sets of data not to mention that the very act of organizing
the data is an opportunity to answer the above questions.
12.5
Affective Methods: Qualitative
12.5.1
Applications
Qualitative affective tests are those (e.g., interviews and focus groups) that measure
subjective responses of a sample of consumers to the sensory properties of products by
having those consumers talk about their feelings in an interview or small group setting.
Qualitative methods are used in the following situations:
† To uncover and understand consumer needs that are unexpressed; for example,
“Why do people buy 4-wheel-drive cars to drive on asphalt?” Researchers that
include anthropologists and ethnographers conduct open-ended interviews. See
Section 12.4 for further information.
† To assess consumers’ initial responses to a product concept and/or a product
prototype. When product researchers need to determine if a concept has some
general acceptance or, conversely, some obvious problems, a qualitative test can
allow consumers to freely discuss the concept and/or a few early prototypes.
The results, a summary, and a tape of such discussions permit the researcher to
better understand the consumers’ initial reactions to the concept or prototypes.
Project direction can be adjusted at this point, in response to the
information obtained.
† To learn consumer terminology to describe the sensory attributes of a concept,
prototype, commercial product, or product category. In the design of a
consumer questionnaire and advertising, it is critical to use consumer-oriented
terms rather than those derived from marketing or product development.
Qualitative tests permit consumers to discuss product attributes openly in
their own words.
† To clarify and expand on consumers responses from quantitative research.
Quantitative research is ideal for determining how consumers like a product
or react to the sensory attributes. However, it does not always fully capture
the nuances or the reasons behind the rating. More in-depth knowledge can
be gained by asking consumers to remain after the quantitative portion for a
one-on-one interview or by having them return at a later date for a
focus group.
† To learn about consumer behavior regarding use of a particular product. When
product researchers wish to determine how consumers use certain products
(package directions) or how consumers respond to the use process (dental
ﬂoss, feminine protection), qualitative tests probe the reasons and practices
of consumer behavior.
In the qualitative methods discussed below, a highly trained interviewer/moderator is
required. Because of the high level of interaction between the interviewer/moderator and
the consumers, the interviewer must learn group dynamics skills, probing techniques,
techniques for appearing neutral, and summarizing and reporting skills.
Affective Tests: Affective Methods: Qualitative
269
