However, variability in taste sensitivity, especially for bitterness with various bitter agents,
is quite common.
Researchers’ understanding of the physiological mechanisms of the principal tastes has
been advancing rapidly, e.g., sweet (Li et al. 2001; Montmayeur et al. 2001; Nelson et al.
2001); sweet and bitter (Ruiz et al. 2001); sweet and umami (Li et al. 2002; Zhao et al. 2003);
sweet, bitter, and umami (Zhang et al. 2003); and sour (Johanningsmeier, McFeeters, and
Drake 2005).
2.3.6
The Sense of Hearing
Figure 2.8 shows a cross-section of a human ear. Vibrations in the local medium, usually
air, cause the eardrum to vibrate. The vibrations are transmitted via the small bones in the
middle ear to create hydraulic motion in the ﬂuid of the inner ear, the cochlea, that is a
spiral canal covered in hair cells that, when agitated, sends neural impulses to the brain.
Students of crispness, etc. should familiarize themselves with the concepts of intensity,
measured in decibels, and pitch, determined by the frequency of sound waves. A possible
source of variation or error that must be controlled in such studies is the creation and/or
propagation of sound inside the cranium, but outside of the ear, e.g., by movement of the
jaws or teeth and propagation via the bone structure.
Psychoacoustics is the science of building vibrational models on a sound oscilloscope to
represent perceived sound stimuli such as pitch, loudness, sharpness, roughness, etc.
These models work for simple sounds but not for more complex ones. They can be
used to answer questions such as “What kind of sound?” and “How loud?” However,
they often fail to provide a sound that is appropriate to what the listener expects.
Recently, academics and engineers who are responsible for sound characteristics of
products have realized the need for a common vocabulary to describe sound attributes
for complex sounds. This occurs because automobile, airframe, and industrial and
Auricle
Cartilage
Mastoid cells
Malleus
Incus
Semicircular
canals
Vestibule
Vestibular N
Facial N
Cochlear N
internal
auditory
canal
Cochlea
Cross section of
eustachian tube
Round
window
Stapes
Drum
membrane
Mastoid tip
External
auditory
canal
FIGURE 2.8
A semidiagrammatic drawing of the ear (From J.W. Kling and L.A. Riggs, eds. 1971. Woodworth and Schlosberg’s
Experimental Psychology, 3rd Ed., Holt, Rinehart & Winston, New York. With permission.)
Sensory Attributes and the Way We Perceive Them
21
