Note: In many cases it is permissible to combine two or more tests so as to obtain
improved discrimination. In the present case, the cans were samples of the same lot,
and the subjects were from the same panel, so combination is permissible. 18C20C
19Z57 correct out of 3!32Z96 trials. From Table 17.10, the critical numbers of
correct replies with 96 samples are 55 at the 10% level of signiﬁcance, and 57 at
the 5% level.
Interpret results: Conclude that a difference exists, signiﬁcant at the 5% level on the basis
of combining three tests. Next, examine any notes made by panelists that describe the
difference. If none is found, submit the samples to a descriptive panel. Ultimately, if
the difference is neither pleasant nor unpleasant, a consumer test may be required to
determine if there is preference for one can or the other.
Example 6.7: Duo–Trio Similarity Test—Replacing Coffee Blend
Problem/situation: A manufacturer of coffee has learned that one coffee bean variety,
that has long been a major component of its blend, will be in short supply for the
next 2 years. A team of researchers has formulated three new blends that they feel
are equivalent in ﬂavor to the current blend. The research team has asked the
sensory evaluation analyst to test the equivalency of these new blends to the
current product.
Project objective: To determine which of the three blends can best be used to replace
the current blend.
Test objective: To test for similarity between the current blend and each of the
project blends.
Test design: Preliminary tests have shown that differences are small and not particu-
larly related to a speciﬁc attribute. Therefore, use of the duo–trio test for similarity is
appropriate. To reduce the risk of missing a perceptible difference, the sensory analyst
proposes the tests be run using 60 panelists each (an increase from the customary 36
used in testing for difference). Using her spreadsheet test-sensitivity analyzer* (see
Section 13.3.5), she has determined that a 60-respondent duo–trio test has a 90%
(i.e., bZ0.10) probability of detecting the situation where pdZ25% of the panelists
can detect a difference, with an accompanying a-risk of approximately 0.25.
The analyst accepts the large a-risk because she is much more concerned with incor-
rectly approving a blend that is different from the control and she only has 60
panelists available for the tests. For each blend, the sensory analyst plans to
conduct one 60-response coffee test spaced over one week. As the preparation and
holding time of the product is a critical factor that inﬂuences ﬂavor, subjects must be
carefully scheduled to arrive within 10 min after preparation of the products. Using
the 12 booths in the sensory lab, prepared with brown-tinted ﬁlters on the lights, the
analyst schedules 12 different subjects for each cell of each test. The use of 12 panelists
per session permits balanced presentation of each sample as the reference sample, as
well as a balanced order of presentation of the two test samples within the cell.
Figure 6.7 shows the analyst’s worksheet.
Samples are presented without cream and sugar. The pots are kept at 1758F and
poured into heated (1308F) ceramic cups that are coded as per the worksheet and
placed in the order that it indicates. Scoresheets (see Figure 6.8) are prepared in
advance to save time, and samples are poured when the subject is already sitting
in the booth.
* Available upon request in Excel as an e-mail attachment from Tom.Carr@CarrConsulting.net.
Overall Difference Tests: Duo–Trio Test
77
