6
Overall Difference Tests: Does a Sensory Difference
Exist between Samples?
6.1
Introduction
Chapter 6 and Chapter 7 contain “cookbook-style” descriptions of individual difference
tests, with examples. The underlying theory will be found in Chapter 5, Measuring
Responses, and in Chapter 13, Basic Statistical Methods. Guidelines for the choice of a
particular test will be found under “Scope and Application” for each test, and also in
summary form in Chapter 15, Guidelines for Choice of Technique.
Difference tests can be set up legitimately in hundreds of different ways, but in practice
the procedures described here have acquired individual names and a history of use. There
are two groups of difference tests with the following characteristics:
Overall difference tests (Chapter 6): Does a sensory difference exist between samples?
These are tests, such as the triangle and the duo–trio, which are designed to show
whether subjects can detect any difference at all between samples.
Attribute difference tests (Chapter 7): How does attribute X differ between samples?
Subjects are asked to concentrate on a single attribute (or a few attributes), e.g.,
“Please rank these samples according to sweetness.” All other attributes are
ignored. Examples are the paired comparison tests, the n-AFC tests (alternative
forced choice), and various types of multiple comparison tests. The intensity
with which the selected attribute is perceived may be measured by any of the
methods described in Chapter 5, e.g., ranking, line scaling, or magnitude esti-
mation (ME).
The 2- and 3-AFC tests are often used in threshold determinations (see Chapter 8).
Affective tests (preference tests, e.g., consumer tests) are also attribute difference tests
(see Chapter 12).
6.2
The Uniﬁed Approach to Difference and Similarity Testing
Discrimination tests can be used to address a variety of practical objectives. In some cases,
researchers are interested in demonstrating that two samples are perceptibly different. In
other cases, researchers want to determine if two samples are sufﬁciently similar to be
used interchangeably. In yet another set of cases, some researchers want to demonstrate a
63
