much greater (up to 100-fold) than the variation between tests by a single individual
(up to 5-fold). The result is slightly biased at best and can be very biased if subjects
falling on the upper or lower limits of the range under test are not reexamined (see
Example 8.1).
The ASTM’s intermediate method (E1432) proceeds to determine individual thresholds
according to Figure 8.2 and then, in a second step, it determines the group threshold
according to Figure 8.3. For this, it requires approximately ﬁve times as many
sample presentations per panelist as the rapid method. In return, the group threshold
and distribution of individual thresholds are both bias free.
The ISO Standard 13301 (ISO 2002) is, in effect, a combination of both of the above. For
the curve-ﬁtting step, the intermediate method uses nonlinear least squares regression (see
Example 8.2). (The ISO procedure permits logistic regression and a maximum likelihood
procedure for which a procedure of calculation using computer spreadsheets has been
introduced.) If results more precise than can be expected with these methods are expected,
one enters the ﬁeld of research projects as such, and any of a number of designs may be
appropriate, e.g., Powers’ Multiple Pairs Test (Powers and Ware 1976; Kelly and Heymann
1989) or signal detection theory (Macmillan and Creelman 1991). Bi and Ennis (1998)
provide a review of these methods and propose an additional procedure for population
thresholds based on the beta-binomial distribution that takes account of the fact that data
for one individual tends to have a much narrower distribution than data for a group
of individuals.
Example 8.1: Threshold of Sunstruck Flavor Compound Added to Beer
Problem/situation: A brewer, aware that beer exposed to UV light develops sunstruck ﬂavor
(3-methyl-2-butene-l-thiol, a compound not otherwise present), wishes to test the protec-
tion offered by various types of packaging material.
Project objective: To choose packaging that offers acceptable protection at minimum cost,
using as criterion the amount of the sunstruck compound formed during irradiation
compared with the threshold amount.
Test objective: To determine the threshold of puriﬁed 3-methyl-2-butene-1-thiol added to
the company’s beer.
Test design: The E679 rapid test is suitable as the need is for good coverage of the
variability among people; twenty-ﬁve panelists each receive six 3-AFC tests with concen-
trations spaced by a factor of three. Limit bias by (1) choosing the range of concentrations
offered with the aid of a preliminary test using ﬁve panelists, and (2) retesting those
panelists who are correct at the lowest or fail at the highest level.
Screen samples: In the preliminary test, ascertain that the base beer is free of sunstruck
ﬂavor and that the 3-methyl-2-butene-1-thiol confers a pure sunstruck character at the
chosen test concentrations.
Conduct the test: Test each panelist at the six concentrations. Test any panelist who is
correct at the lowest level once or twice more at that level and include sets at one or
two lower levels. Likewise, test any panelist who fails at the highest level twice more
at that level and at one or two higher levels. Record and analyze results, as shown in
Table 8.1. The best estimate threshold (BET) for each subject is the geometric mean of
the highest concentration missed and the next higher concentration. The group BET is
the geometric mean of the individual BETs. Repeat the test series at least once on a
different day, using the same observers. Note that thresholds often decrease as pane-
lists become accustomed to the ﬂavor of the substance and the mechanics of the test.
If the threshold decreases more than 20%, repeat the test series until the values
stabilize.
Determining Threshold
133
