of all. The complete data in Table 14.6 and the plot of the interaction in Figure 14.23a show
this would be an incorrect conclusion.
The recommended procedure for applying factorial treatment structures in sensory
evaluation is as follows. Prepare at least two independent replications of the full factorial
experiment. Submit the resulting samples for panel evaluation using the appropriate
blocking structure as described in Chapter 13, p. 339. Take the mean responses from the
analysis of the panel data and use them as raw data in an ANOVA. The output of the
ANOVA includes tests for main effects and interactions among the experimental
factors (see Table 14.7). This procedure avoids confusing the measurement error, obtained
from the analysis of the panel data, with the true experimental error that can only be
obtained from the differences among the independently replicated treatment combinations.
14.4.2
Fractional Factorials and Screening Studies
Early in a research program, many variables are proposed as possibly having meaningful
effects on the important responses. To execute an efﬁcient research plan experimenters
need an approach that will allow them to screen out the inﬂuential variables from those
that have little or no impact on the responses. This determination must be done with a
minimum amount of work so that sufﬁcient resources exist at the end of the program to do
the necessary ﬁne-tuning and “ﬁnishing” work on the ﬁnal prototype. There are a class of
experimental plans called fractional factorials that allow researchers to screen for the effects
of many variables simultaneously with a minimum number of experimental samples.
As the number of experimental variables grows in a factorial experiment, each main
effect is estimated by an increasing number of “hidden replications.” For example, as
noted in the previous section, in a 2!2 (or 22) factorial, each main effect is estimated by
two differences (i.e., two hidden replications). In a 26 factorial (i.e., six factors, each with
two levels), the number of hidden replications for estimating each main effect has grown to
32. This may be excessive. A single replication of a 26 factorial consists of 64 experimental
samples. If interest is primarily focused on identifying individual experimental variables
with signiﬁcant main effects, then the number of hidden replications could safely be
reduced to 16 or even 8 without excessively sacriﬁcing sensitivity. The number of experi-
mental samples would be concurrently reduced to 32 or 16, thus yielding a manageable
experiment. Figure 14.24 shows that the number of samples in a 23 factorial can be cut in
half, from eight to four, while still providing two differences for estimating each
main effect.
TABLE 14.7
ANOVA Table for a Factorial Experiment
Source of
Variation
Degrees of
Freedom
Sum of
Squares
Mean Square
F
Total
rabK1
SST
A
aK1
SSA
MSAZSSA/(aK1)
FAZMSA/MSE
B
bK1
SSB
MSBZSSB/(bK1)
FBZMSB/MSE
AB
dfABZ(aK1) (bK1)
SSAB
MSABZSSAB/dfAB
FABZMSAB/MSE
Error
dfEZab(rK1)
SSE
MSEZSSE/dfE
Note:
Factor A has “a” levels, factor B has “b” levels, and the entire experiment is replicated “r” times. The
samples are prepared according to a completely randomized blocking structure.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
396
