14
Advanced Statistical Methods
14.1
Introduction
The basic statistical techniques presented in Chapter 13 are all that would be required to
analyze the results of most sensory tests. However, when the objectives of the study go
beyond simple estimation or discrimination, then more sophisticated statistical methods
may need to be applied. This chapter presents some of the more common of these
advanced techniques. The computational complexity of the methods makes hand calcu-
lation impractical. It is assumed that the reader has access to computer resources capable
of performing the necessary calculations.
Sensory studies seldom include only a single response variable. More often, many
variables are measured on each sample and often one of the goals of the study is to
determine how the different “multivariate” measurements relate to each other.
Approaches for studying multivariate data relationships are presented in Section 14.2.
First, correlation analysis, principal components analysis (PCA), and cluster analysis are
discussed. These techniques are used to study sets of multivariate data in which all of the
variables are of equal status. Second, regression analysis, principal component regression,
partial least-squares, and discriminant analysis are presented. These methods apply when
the variables in the data set can be classiﬁed as being either independent or dependent,
with the goal of the analysis being to predict the value of the dependent variables using the
independent variables. Section 14.3 presents the various approaches to preference
mapping in which all of the methods presented in Section 14.2 are applied to link
consumer acceptance to the sensory properties of a group of test products. In Section
14.4, experimental plans for systematically studying the individual and combined
effects of more than one experimental variable are presented. The discussion includes
factorial experiments, fractional factorials (or “screening studies”) and response surface
methodology (or “product optimization studies”).
14.2
Data Relationships
The need to determine if relationships exist among different variables often arises in
sensory evaluation. The manner and degree that different descriptive attributes increase
or decrease together, the similarity among consumers’ liking patterns for various
products, and the ability to predict the value of a perceived attribute based on the age
of a product are three examples of this type of problem.
357
