well-motivated panelists should not let themselves be inﬂuenced by accidental knowledge
about a sample; in practice, however, the subject does not know how much to adjust his
verdict for the expected autosuggestion, and it is much better for him/her to be ignorant of
the history of the sample.
4.3.2
Error of Habituation
Humans have been described as creatures of habit. This description holds true in the
sensory world and leads to an error, the error of habituation. This error results from a
tendency to continue to give the same response when a series of slowly increasing or
decreasing stimuli are presented, for example, in quality control from day to day. The
panelist tends to repeat the same scores and hence to miss any developing trend or even
accept an occasional defective sample. Habituation is common and must be counteracted
by varying the types of product or presenting doctored samples.
4.3.3
Stimulus Error
This error is caused when irrelevant criteria, such as the style or color of the container,
inﬂuence the observer. If the criteria suggest differences, the panelist will ﬁnd them even
when they do not exist. For example, Amerine, Pangborn, and Roessler (1965) presented
an example in which tasters, knowing that wines in screw-capped bottles were, at that
time, usually less expensive, may produce lower ratings when served from such bottles
than if served from cork-closure bottles. Urgently-called panel sessions may trigger
reports of known production defects. Samples served late in a test may be rated more
ﬂavorful because panelists know that the panel leader will present light-ﬂavored samples
ﬁrst to minimize fatigue. The remedies in these cases are obvious: avoid leaving irrelevant
(as well as relevant) cues, schedule panel sessions regularly, and make frequent and
irregular departures from any usual order or manner of presentation.
4.3.4
Logical Error
Logical errors occur when two or more characteristics of the samples are associated in the
minds of the assessors. Knowledge that a darker beer tends to be more ﬂavorful, or that
darker mayonnaise tends to be stale, causes the observer to modify his verdict, thus dis-
regarding his own perceptions. Logical errors must be minimized by keeping the samples
uniform and by masking differences with the aid of colored glasses, colored lights, etc.
Certain logical errors cannot be masked but may be avoided in other ways; for example,
a more bitter beer will always tend to receive a higher score for hop aroma. With trained
panelists, the leader may attempt to break the logical association by occasionally doctoring a
sample with quinine to produce high bitterness combined with low hop aroma.
4.3.5
Halo Effect
When more than one attribute of a sample is evaluated, the ratings will tend to inﬂu-
ence each other (halo effect). Simultaneous scoring of various ﬂavor aspects along with
overall acceptability can produce different results than if each characteristic is evaluated
separately. For example, in a consumer test of orange juice, subjects are asked not only
to rate their overall liking, but also to rate speciﬁc attributes. When the product is
generally well liked, all of its various aspects—sweetness, acidity, fresh orange
Factors Inﬂuencing Sensory Verdicts
41
