Burnt: related to overheating, overtoasting, or scorching
the starches or sugars in a product.
e. Added ﬂavors/
aromatics
The following terms relate to speciﬁc ingredients which
may be added aromatics to baked goods to impart
speciﬁc character notes; in each case, references for the
term are needed:
Nutty: peanut, almond, pecan, etc.
Chocolate: milk chocolate, cocoa, chocolate-like.
Spices: cinnamon, clove, nutmeg, etc.
Yeasty: natural yeast (not chemical leavening).
f. Aromatics from
shortening
The aromatics associated with oil or fat-based
shortening agents used shortening in baked goods:
Buttery: see dairy above.
Oil ﬂavor: the aromatics associated with vegetable oils,
not to be confused with an oily ﬁlm on the mouth
surfaces, which is a texture characteristic.
Lard ﬂavor: the aromatics associated with rendered
pork fat.
Tallowy: the aromatics associated with rendered beeffat.
g. Other aromatics
The aromatics which are not usually part of the normal
product proﬁle and/or do not result from the normal
ingredients or processing of the product:
Vitamin: aromatics resulting from the addition of
vitamins to the product.
Cardboard ﬂavor: aromatics associated with the odor of
cardboard box packaging, which could be contributed
by the packaging or by other sources, such as
staling ﬂours.
Rancid: aromatics associated with oxidized oils, often
also described as painty or ﬁshy.
Mercaptan: aromatics associated with the mercaptan
class of sulfur compounds. Other terms which panelists
may use to describe odors arising from sulfur
compounds are skunky, sulﬁtic, rubbery.
(End of section referring to baked goods only.)
2
Basic Tastes
a. Sweet
The taste stimulated by sucrose and other sugars, such
as fructose, glucose, etc., and by other sweet substances
such as saccharin, Aspartame, and Acesulfam K.
b. Sour
The taste stimulated by acids, such as citric, malic,
phosphoric, etc.
c. Salty
The taste stimulated by sodium salts, such as sodium
chloride and sodium glutamate, and in part by other
salts, such as potassium chloride.
d. Bitter
The taste stimulated by substances such as quinine,
caffeine, and hop bitters.
The Spectrume Descriptive Analysis Method: Appendix 11.1
197
