nature of perception, in one trial the answer is correct and in the other the answer
is incorrect.
Ennis (1993) shows that because of differences in the decisions rules, discrimination
methods differ in their ability to detect a given-sized sensory difference, d. In general, the
more complex the decision rule, the more assessors are required to deliver the same
statistical power from the test. For example, 2-AFC and 3-AFC tests are more powerful
than the duo–trio and triangle test. Frijters (1979) used this approach to resolve the
“paradox of discriminatory nondiscriminators.”
13.4.3
Estimating the Value of d
13.4.3.1
Forced-Choice Methods
The proportion of correct answers in a forced-choice test increases as the distance between
the products increases. The proportion of correct answers can be combined with the
decision rule of the test to estimate the value for d. Tables of d0, the statistic used to estimate
d are widely available (see, for example, ASTM (2003), Elliott (1964), and Ennis (1993)). In
addition, ASTM (2003), and Bi, Ennis, and O’Mahony (1997) have published tables of the
variance of d0. Knowing the variance of the estimate allows researchers to construct conﬁ-
dence intervals and statistical tests regarding the true value of d. Software that computes d0
and its associated statistics also is available, for example, from The Institute for Perception
(Ennis 2001).
The process for obtaining the value of d0 is the same for all of the forced-choice tests that
have a ﬁxed, null-hypothesis probability of a correct response (2-AFC, 3-AFC, duo–trio,
and triangle). For each of these tests, the value of d0 is proportional to the observed
proportion of correct responses. This is not the case for the “A”–“not A” and the same-
different tests. Both of these test methods involve a placebo effect. For example, in the “A”–
“not A” method, an assessor will tolerate some deviation around the average of the A
distribution and still consider the perception as coming from a sample of product A. When
the perception falls too far from the average of the A distribution, the assessor will classify
the sample as “not A.” The boundary that the assessor uses to make this decision is called
c. Similarly, for the same–different test, the maximum difference in the perceptions of the
two samples that will still be classiﬁed as “same” is t (see Table 13.9). These new para-
meters, called cognitive criteria, play a role in how the values of d0 are obtained from each of
the methods. In addition, the cognitive criteria can reveal the degree to which assessors
vary in their tolerance of natural variation in perception.
13.4.3.2
Methods Using Scales
The Thurstonian model for category scales makes use of the c criterion from the “A”–“not
A” test. Multiple c values are deﬁned to mark the boundaries of the successive scale
categories. For example, on a nine-point scale, there are eight c values, c1 through c8. To
receive a rating of 5, the perceived intensity of a sample must be greater than c4 boundary,
but less than c5 boundary, as illustrated in Figure 13.13. The c values tend to not be equally
spaced along the sensory dimension. Unequal spacing occurs due to biases in the asses-
sors’ behavior. For example, the neutral 5 category on a nine-point scale tends to be
narrower than adjoining categories because assessors prefer to provide some positive or
negative response, even if it is only weakly held.
In addition to providing d0 estimates of the differences among samples, identifying the
boundaries between categories reveals interesting information about how assessors are
using the scales.
Basic Statistical Methods
337
