As with the validity and reliability of terminology, the validity and reliability of inten-
sity measurements are highly dependent upon:
† The selection of a scaling technique that is broad enough to encompass the full
range of parameter intensities and that has enough discrete points to pick up all
the small differences in intensity between samples;
† The thorough training of the panelists to use the scale in a similar way across all
samples and across time (see Chapter 9 on panelist training);
† The use of reference scales for intensity of different properties (see Appendix
11.2) to ensure consistent use of scales for different intensities of sensory proper-
ties across panelists and repeated evaluations.
Three types of scales are commonly used in descriptive analysis (see also Lawless and
Heymann 1998):
1. Category scales are limited sets of words or numbers, constructed (as best as one
can) to maintain equal intervals between categories. A full description can be
found in Chapter 5. A category scale from 0 to 9 is perhaps the most used in
descriptive analysis, but longer scales are often justiﬁed. A good rule of thumb is
to evaluate how many steps a panelist can meaningfully employ and to adopt a
scale twice that length. Sometimes a 100-point scale is justiﬁed, e.g., in visual and
auditory studies.
2. Line scales utilize a line 6 in. or 15 cm long that the panelist makes a mark on; they
are described in Chapter 5. Line scales are almost as popular as category scales.
Their advantage is that the intensity can be more accurately graded because there
are no steps or “favorite numbers.” The chief disadvantage to using line
scales is that it is harder for a panelist to be consistent because a position on a
line is not as easily remembered as a number.
3. Magnitude estimation (ME) scales are based on free assignment of the ﬁrst
number, after that, all subsequent numbers are assigned in proportion (see
Chapter 5). ME is mostly used in academic studies where the focus is on a
single attribute that can vary over a wide range of sensory intensities (Moskowitz
1975, 1978).
Chapter 11, Appendix 11.2 contains sets of reference samples useful for the establishment
of scales for various odors and tastes and also for the mechanical, geometrical, and moisture
properties of oral texture. All the scales in Appendix 11.2 are based on a 15-cm line scale;
however, the same standards can be distributed along a line or scale of any length or
numerical value. The scales employ standard aqueous solutions such as sucrose, sodium
chloride, citric acid, and caffeine as well as certain widely available supermarket items that
have shown adequate consistency, e.g., Hellmann’sw Mayonnaise and Welch’sw
Grape Juice.
10.3.3
Order of Appearance: The Time Aspect
In addition to accounting for the attributes (qualitative) of a sample and the intensity of each
attribute (quantitative), panels can often detect differences among products in the order in
which certain parameters manifest themselves. The orderof appearance of physical proper-
ties, related to oral, skin, and fabric textures, are generally predetermined by the way the
product is handled (the input offorces by the panelist). By controlling the manipulation (one
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 10
176
