and, as a result, the true preferences of individuals may be masked by averaging their
liking ratings with those who have different product preferences. Therefore,
before performing the analysis that links the sensory and consumer information, it is
important to ensure that the average liking ratings of the products come from groups of
consumers with similar preferences. Cluster analysis is the tool that is used to accomplish
this task.
As discussed in the previous section, several methods are available to perform cluster
analyses and there are many variations within each of the major methods. In the analysis
of the prepared meals data, hierarchical clustering using Ward’s method was applied. The
data that were analyzed were the overall liking ratings of the consumers. The respondents
formed the rows (observations) of the data set; the products formed the columns (vari-
ables). The liking ratings were centered by subtracting each respondent’s average liking
rating from each of his or her individual ratings. Centering removes scale-usage effects
from the raw data. For example, two respondents may have the same preferences for the
test products, but one respondent tends to use the middle part of the scale (4, 5, and 6) to
rate the products, whereas the other respondent uses the high end of the scale (7, 8, and 9)
to rate the products. Centering the liking ratings allows the cluster analysis to group the
respondents based on their patterns of liking ratings across the products rather than on
their absolute levels.
The dendrogram in Figure 14.16 suggests that either two or four preference segments
are present. The ﬁnal decision on how many preference segments to include on the
preference map needs to balance the internal homogeneity of the segments against their
size. Averaging liking ratings from fewer than 25 to 30 respondents should be avoided
because averages from such small groups lack precision. In the present example, two of
the four segments have fewer than 25 respondents in them. For that reason, two preference
segments were chosen.
The differences between the segments is illustrated in the graph of their average overall
liking ratings (see Figure 14.17). Segment 1 exhibits a wide range of average ratings.
Similarity
–196.04
–97.36
1.32
100.00
Observations
FIGURE 14.16
The dendrogram of the consumers’ centered overall liking ratings suggests either two or four segments. The two
segment solution was chosen because two of the segments in the four-segment solution have fewer than 25
respondents in them.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
386
