(if directed to the project leader) should state and explain the test objective; if the report
covers a complete project, it should state and explain the project objective as well as the
objective of each test that formed part of the project.
In some cases, e.g., if the report is for publication, the explanation should take the form
of an introduction that includes a review, with references, of pertinent previous work. This
should be followed by a brief deﬁnition of the problem. It is of great importance to state
the approach that was taken to solve the problem; Chapter 15, Table 15.1, which follows
the IFT (1981), should assist in this regard. If the study is based on a hypothesis, this
hypothesis should be made evident to the reader in the introduction. Subsequent sections
of the report should provide the test of the hypothesis.
16.4
Experimental
The experimental section should provide sufﬁcient detail to allow the work to be repeated.
Accepted methods should be cited by adequate references. It is sometimes overlooked that
subheadings in the experimental section help the reader ﬁnd speciﬁc information. The
section should describe the important steps in collecting the sensory data and will usually
include the following:
Experimental design. Assuming that the objective was clearly stated previously, the text
should now explain the “layout” of the experiment in terms of the objective. If there are
major and minor objectives, the report should show how this is reﬂected in the design. If
an advanced design is used (randomized complete block, balanced incomplete block,
Latin-square, etc.), it can be described by reference to the appropriate section of
Cochran and Cox (1957: 469). Next, state the measurements made (e.g., sensory, physical,
chemical), sample variables and level of the variables (where appropriate), number of
replications, and limitations of the design (e.g., lots available for sampling, nature and
number of samples evaluated in a test session). Describe the efforts made to reduce the
experimental error.
Sensory methods. When describing the methods employed, use the terminology in this
book (see Chapter 15, Table 15.2 through Table 15.5), which is the same as that of the
International Standards Organization (1985, 2004) and the IFT (1981).
The panel. The number of panelists for each experimental condition should be stated
as it inﬂuences the statistical signiﬁcance of the results obtained. If too few panelists
are used, large differences are required for statistical signiﬁcance, whereas if too many
are used (e.g., 1000 for a triangle test), statistical signiﬁcance may result when the
actual difference is too small to have practical meaning. Changes in the panel during
the course of the experiments should be avoided, but if they do occur, they must be
fully described. The extent of previous training and the methods used to prepare the
panelists for the current tests, including a full description of any reference standards
used, are important information needed to judge the validity of the results. The
composition of the panel (age, sex, etc.) should be described if any affective tests
were part of the experiment.
Conditions of the test. The physical conditions of the test area as well as the way samples
are prepared and presented are important variables that inﬂuence both reliability and
validity of the results. The report should contain the following information:
1. Test area. The location of the test area (booth, store, home, bus) should be stated,
and any distractions present (odors, noise, heat, cold, lighting) should be
described together with efforts made to minimize their inﬂuence.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 16
414
