respect to overall differences and attribute differences (difference panels) or full descrip-
tions of product standards, product changes over time, or ingredient and processing
manipulation, and for construction and interpretation of consumer questionnaires
(descriptive panels). The sensory analyst must also deﬁne the resources required to
develop and maintain a sensory panel system.
9.2.1
Personnel
Heading the list of resources required is (1) a large enough pool of available candidates
from which the panel can be selected (see Appendix 9.2A for possible sources for panel
candidates), (2) a sensory staff to implement the selection, training, and maintenance
procedures, including a panel leader and technician, and (3) a qualiﬁed person to
conduct the training process. Ideally, panelists should come from within the organization,
as they are located at the site where the samples are prepared (e.g., R&D facility or plant).
Before a descriptive panel is trained, consideration is given to the choice of a panel leader.
An effective panel leader is a person who is able to serve as the connection between
product developers or other panel clients. The panel leader works with the panel to
ensure that the panel has a clear understanding of attributes and scales as well as the
ability to translate the panel data into actionable information. A successful panel leader is
also a person who (1) has knowledge of sensory attributes; (2) has good group dynamic
skills; (3) has listening and or attending skills; (4) is creatively alert; and (5) is patient. A
panel leader may come from the panel itself. If this is the case, the panel leader should be
additionally trained to manage the panel and communicate with the research team so that
the information provided to product developers and other scientists is reliable, valid, and
useful. If a panel is large, a panel technician may also be required to be responsible for all
sample procurement, preparation, and presentation, as well as completing all the necess-
ary documentation of the panel protocol and data output.
Some companies choose to test products at a different site, which may be another
company facility. With reduced laboratory stafﬁng, many companies have opted to use
residents recruited from the local community as panelists rather than bench chemists and
support staff from the labs. Outside panelists may be available for more hours per week,
and may be cheaper and more focused for longer panel sessions. The primary drawbacks
of external panelists are that they often require more time and effort to train in the tech-
nical aspects of panel work, and that they do not provide the inherent proprietary security
of internal employees.
Panel candidates and management must understand, in advance, the amount of time
required (personnel hours) for the selection and training of the particular panel in ques-
tion. An assessment of the number of hours needed for panelists, technicians, and a panel
leader should be presented and accepted before the development process is initiated. The
individual designated to select and train the panel is often a member of the sensory staff
who is experienced and trained in the speciﬁc selection and training techniques needed for
the challenge at hand.
9.2.2
Facilities
The physical area for the selection, training, and ongoing work of a panel must be deﬁned
before development of the panel begins. A training room and panel testing facilities
(booths and/or round table, conference room, etc.) must have the proper environmental
controls (see Chapter 3), be of sufﬁcient size to handle all of the panelists and products
projected, and be located near the product preparation area and panelist pool.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 9
142
