14.3.2.5
External Preference Mapping of Individual Respondents
Another approach to external preference mapping is to ﬁt individual regression models to
each respondent’s overall liking data. As in internal preference mapping, respondents
with poor ﬁtting models can be dropped from further analyses. For the remaining respon-
dents, an action standard is deﬁned to represent “satisfaction.” For example, a respondent
could be said to be “satisﬁed” with any point on the preference map with a predicted
liking rating of 5.0 or more. Alternatively, a respondent could be said to be “satisﬁed” with
any point on the map that has a predicted liking rating within 0.5 units of his or her
maximum predicted liking rating. The percentage of respondents who are satisﬁed with
every point on the preference map is then plotted on a contour plot such as in Figure 14.20.
An advantage of this approach is that, like internal preference mapping, it is self-
segmenting. Multiple target products can be identiﬁed as separate points on the map
that correspond to areas of high satisfaction. An advantage that this approach does not
share with internal preference mapping is that each respondents data can be ﬁt using an
ideal point model, so interior points on the map can be identiﬁed as the point of maximum
overall liking. (Internal preference mapping is, in a sense, a vector model, in that it can
only point in the direction of increasing liking.) The disadvantage of the method is that the
models of the individual respondent’s data are often poor. Either many respondents are
dropped from the analysis or a very liberal deﬁnition of an acceptable model needs to be
used to keep a large proportion of the respondents in the analysis.
14.3.3
Partial Least-Squares Mapping
PLS mapping is a direct application of partial least-squares regression described in Section
14.2.2.3. As a preference-mapping tool, the dependent (y) variables in the PLS model are
FIGURE 14.19
A contour plot of the ﬁrst two dimensions of the preference map from the prepared meals study. Any point on a
line is predicted to have an overall liking rating of the value indicated. Overall liking is maximized at high levels
of “wholesomeness” and medium-high levels of “sauce: clear to viscous.” To stay within the conﬁnes of the
product space, the target product lies on the convex hull. The trends indicate the higher levels of both dimensions
may be more well-liked.
Advanced Statistical Methods
389
