panelists who have sensory acuity but cannot acquire the “technical” orientation of panels
recruited from inside the company.
9.4.2.1
Prescreening Questionnaires
For a panel of 15, typically 40–50 candidates may be prescreened using questionnaires
such as those shown in Appendix 9.1. Appendix 9.1A applies to a tactile panel (skinfeel or
fabric feel); Appendix 9.1B to a ﬂavor panel; Appendix 9.1C to an oral texture panel; and
Appendix 9.1D to a fragrance panel. Appendix 9.1E evaluates the candidate’s potential to
learn scaling and can be used with any of the preceding questionnaires in Appendix 9.1.
Of the 40–50 original candidates, generally 20–30 qualify and proceed to the acuity tests.
9.4.2.2
Acuity Tests
To qualify for this stage, candidates should:
† Indicate no medical or pharmaceutical causes of limited perception.
† Be available for the training sessions.
† Answer 80% of the verbal questions in the prescreening questionnaires in
Appendix 9.1A through Appendix 9.1D correctly and clearly.
† In the questionnaire Appendix 9.1E, assign scalar ratings that are within 10–20%
of the correct value for all ﬁgures.
Candidates should demonstrate ability to:
† Detect and describe characteristics present in a qualitative sense.
† Detect and describe intensity differences in a quantitative sense.
Therefore, although detection tests (e.g., triangle or duo-trio tests using variations in
formulation or processing of the product to be evaluated) may yield a group of
subjects who can detect small product variables, detection alone is not enough for a
descriptive panelist. To qualify, subjects must be able to adequately discriminate and
describe some key sensory attributes within the modalities used within the product
class under test, and also must show ability to use a rating scale correctly to describe
differences in intensity.
Detection. The panel trainer presents a series of samples representing key variables
within the product class, in the form of triangle or duo-trio tests (Zook and Wesmann
1977). Differences in process time or temperature (roast, bake, etc.), ingredient level (50%
or 150% of normal), or packaging can be used as sample pairs to determine acuity in
detection. Attempt to present the easier pairs of samples ﬁrst and follow with pairs of
increasing difﬁculty. Select subjects who achieve 50–60% correct replies in triangle tests, or
70–80% in duo-trio tests, depending on the degree of difﬁculty of each test.
Description. Present a series of products showing distinct attribute characteristics
(fragrance/ﬂavor oils, geometrical texture properties [Civille and Szczesniak 1973]) and
ask candidates to describe the sensory impression. Use the fragrance list in Table 9.1
without a list of descriptors from which to choose. The candidate must describe each
fragrance using his/her own words. These may include chemical terms (e.g., cinnamic
aldehyde), common ﬂavor terms (e.g., cinnamon), or related terms (e.g., like Red Hots
candy, Big Red gum, and Dentyne). Candidates should be able to describe 80% of the
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 9
150
