The various statistical methods that exist for drawing relationships among variables can
be divided into two groups. The ﬁrst group of methods handles data sets in which all of
the variables are independent, in the sense that they are all equally important with no one
or few variables being viewed as being driven by the others (e.g., a set of descriptive ﬂavor
attributes). The second group of methods is applied to data sets that contain both depen-
dent and independent variables. These are data sets in which one or more of the variables
are of special or greater interest relative to some others (e.g., overall liking vs. descriptive
attribute ratings). Because the methods in both of these groups deal with more than one
variable at a time, they are members of the class of “multivariate” statistical methods.
14.2.1
All Independent Variables
When all of the variables are viewed as being equally important, the goal of the statistical
analyses is to determine the nature and degree of relationships among the variables, to
determine if groups of related variables exist, or to determine if distinct groups of
observations exist.
14.2.1.1
Correlation Analysis
The simplest of multivariate techniques, correlation analysis, is used for measuring the
strength of the linear relationship between two variables. The strength of the relationship
between attributes X and Y, for instance, is summarized in the correlation coefﬁcient r, where:
r Z
S yiKy


xiKx


ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
S yiKy

2S xiKx

2
q
The value of r lies between K1 and C1. A value of K1 indicates a perfect inverse linear
relationship (i.e.,one variable decreases asthe other increases) while a value of C1 indicates a
perfect direct linear relationship (i.e., both variables either increase or decrease together).
A value near zero implies that little linear relationship exists between the two variables.
A strong correlation does not imply causality, that is, neither variable can automatically
be assumed to be “driving” the other, but rather that the two co-vary to some degree.
Correlation coefﬁcients are summary measures. An analyst should always examine the
scatterplots of the paired variables before deciding if the value of r is an adequate
summary of the relationship. A strong linear trend among relatively evenly spaced obser-
vations, as in Figure 14.1a, is safely summarized by the correlation coefﬁcient, as is an
unpatterned spread of observations spanning the ranges of both variables, as in
Figure 14.1b. Some relationships may have high values of r but are clearly better sum-
marized in nonlinear terms, as in Figure 14.1c. In other cases, patterns that are clearly
apparent visually may have very low values of r, as in Figure 14.1d and Figure 14.1e.
Conversely, the correlation coefﬁcient may be misleadingly large when distinct groups of
observations (with no internal correlation) are present, as in Figure 14.1f. A scatterplot
matrix (see Figure 14.2) allows all of the pairwise plots of the data to be displayed in a
compact format.
Correlation analysis can be used to identify groups of responses that vary in similar
ways, possibly distinct from other such groups. Also, correlation analysis can be used to
determine the strength of the relationship between data arising from different sources
(e.g., consumer ratings and descriptive data from a trained panel, descriptive attribute
ratings, and instrumental measurements, etc.). Chapter 12, p. 283, contains examples of
these types of relationships.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
358
