12.3.2
Central Location Tests
Central location tests are usually conducted in an area where potential purchasers
congregate or can be assembled. The organizer sets up a booth or rents a room at
a fair, shopping mall, church, or test agency. A product used by schoolchildren may
be tested in the school playground; a product for analytical chemists may be tested at
a professional convention. Respondents are intercepted and screened in the open, and
those selected for testing are led to a closed-off area. Subjects can also be prescreened
by phone and invited to a test site prerecruited. Typically, 50–300 responses are
collected per location. Products are prepared out of sight and served on uniform
plates (cups, glasses) labeled with three-digit codes. The potential for distraction
may be high, so instructions and questions should be clear and concise; examples
of score sheets are provided in Appendix 12.3. In a variant of the procedure, products
are dispensed openly from original packaging, and respondents are shown story-
boards with examples of advertising and descriptions of how products will be
positioned in the market.
The advantages of central location tests are:
† Respondents evaluate the product under conditions controlled by the organizer;
any misunderstandings can be cleared up and a truer response obtained.
† The products are tested by the end users themselves; this assures the validity of
the results.
† Conditions are favorable for a high percentage return of responses from a large
sample population.
† Several products may be tested by one consumer during a test session, thus
allowing for a considerable amount of information for the cost per consumer.
The main disadvantages of central location tests are:
† The product is being tested under conditions that are artiﬁcial in comparison to
normal use at home or at parties, restaurants, etc., in terms of preparation,
amount consumed, and length and time of use.
† The number of questions that can be asked may be limited versus testing in the
home. This in turn limits the information obtainable from the data with regard to
the preferences of different age groups, socioeconomic groups, etc.
12.3.3
Home Use Tests
In most cases, home use tests (or home placement tests) represent the ultimate in
consumer research. The product is tested under its normal conditions of use. The partici-
pants are selected to represent the target population. The entire family’s opinion can be
obtained, with the inﬂuence of one family member on another taken into account. In
addition to the product itself, the home use test provides a check on the package to be
used and the product preparation instructions, if applicable. Typical panel sizes are 75–300
per city in 3 or 4 cities. Often, two products are compared. The ﬁrst is used for 4–7 days and
its corresponding scoresheet is completed, after which the second is supplied and rated.
The two products should not be provided together because of the opportunities for using
the wrong clues as the basis for evaluation, or assigning responses to the wrong scoresheet.
Examples of scoresheets are provided in Appendix 12.3.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
264
