aZ0.01 is to be obtained, while with 50 presentations, the same signiﬁcance can be
obtained with 35 agreeing verdicts.
7.2.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see pp. 25 and 34. Offer samples simultaneously if
possible, or else sequentially. Prepare equal numbers of the combinations AB and BA and
allocate the sets at random among the subjects. Refer to p. 66 for details of procedure. A
typical scoresheet is shown in Figure 7.1. Note that the scoresheet is the same whether the
test is one- or two-sided, but the scoresheet must show whether “no difference” verdicts
are permitted (or the subjects must know this). Space for several successive paired
comparisons may be provided on a single scoresheet, but do not add supplemental ques-
tions because these may introduce bias.
Count the number of responses of interest. In a one-sided test, count the number of
correct responses, or the responses in the direction of interest, and refer to Table 7.10. In a
two-sided test, count the number of agreeing responses citing one sample more frequently,
and refer to Table 7.12.
Example 7.1: Directional Difference (Two-Sided)—Crystal Mix Lemonade
Problem/situation: Consumer research on lemonades indicates that consumers are most
interested in a lemon/lemonade ﬂavor most like “fresh-squeezed lemonade.” The
company has developed two promising ﬂavor systems for a powdered mix. The deve-
lopers wish to get some measure of whether one of these has more fresh-squeezed lemon
character than the other.
Directional Difference Test
Name:
Date:
Type of sample:
Characteristic studied:
Instructions:
Taste each pair from left to right and enter your verdict
below.
If no difference is apparent, enter your best guess,
however uncertain. "No difference" verdicts are
permitted, but only as a last resort.
Test pairs
Which sample is more
Comments :
FIGURE 7.1
Example of scoresheet for directional
difference
test.
Presentation:
paired
comparisons. “No difference” verdicts
permitted.
Attribute Difference Tests: Directional Difference Test
107
