2
Sensory Attributes and the Way We Perceive Them
2.1
Introduction
This chapter reviews (1) the sensory attributes with which the book is concerned, e.g., the
appearance, odor, ﬂavor, and feel of different products and (2) the mechanisms that people
use to perceive those attributes, e.g., the visual, olfactory, gustatory, and tactile/kinesthetic
senses. The briefness of the chapter is dictated by the scope of the book, and it is not an
indication of the importance of the subject. The sensory professional is urged to study the
references to this chapter, for example the following: Amerine, Pangborn, and Roessler
1965; ASTM 1968; Civille and Lyon 1996; Lawless and Heymann 1998, and stone and Sidel
2004, and to build a good library of books and journals on sensory perception.
Sensory testing is an inexact science. Experimental designs need to be based on a thorough
knowledge of the physical and chemical factors behind the attributes of interest.
Results of sensory tests, as a rule, have many possible explanations, and the chances of
misinterpretation can be reduced by every bit of new knowledge about the workings
of human’s senses and the true nature of product attributes.
2.2
Sensory Attributes
The attributes of a food item are typically perceived in the following order:
† Appearance
† Odor/aroma/fragrance
† Consistency and texture
† Flavor (aromatics, chemical feelings, taste)
However, in the process of perception, most or all of the attributes overlap, i.e., the
subject receives a jumble of near-simultaneous sensory impressions, and without training,
he or she will not be able to provide an independent evaluation of each. This section gives
examples of the types of sensory attributes that exist in terms of the way that they are
perceived and the terms that may be associated with them.
In this book, ﬂavor is the combined impression perceived via the chemical senses from a
product in the mouth, i.e., it does not include appearance and texture. The term aromatics is
used to indicate those volatile constituents that originate from food in the mouth and are
perceived by the olfactory system via the posterior nares.
7
