3.3.2.2
Materials
Equipment used for preparation and presentation of samples must be carefully selected to
reduce the introduction of biases and new variables. Most plastic cutlery, storage
containers, and wraps or bags are unsuitable for preparation of foods, beverages, or
personal-care products. The transfer of volatiles to and from the plastic can change the
aroma and/or ﬂavor characteristics of a product.
Wooden materials should not be used for cutting boards, bowls, mixing utensils, or
pastry boards. They are porous and absorb aqueous and oil-based materials that are
then easily transferred from the wood to the next product which the wood contacts.
Containers used for storage, preparation, or serving should therefore be glass, glazed
china, or stainless steel because of the reduced transfer of volatiles with these materials.
Plastic, which has been pretested for low odor transfer, should be used only when the test
product(s) will be held for less than 10 min in the container during and prior to the test.
3.3.2.3
Preparation Procedures
The controlled preparation of products requires careful regulation and monitoring of
procedures used, with attention given to
† Amount of product to be used, measured by weight or volume using precise
equipment (volumetric cylinders, gram scales, etc.)
† Amount of each added ingredient (as above).
† The process of preparation, regulation of time (stopwatch), temperature (thermo-
meters).
† Holding time, deﬁned as the minimum and maximum time after preparation
that a product can be used for a sensory test.
3.3.3
Sample Presentation
3.3.3.1
Container, Sample Size, and Other Particulars
The equipment and procedures used for product presentation during the test must be
carefully selected to reduce introduction of biases and new variables. Attention should
be given to control of the following:
Serving containers. Again, these are preferably glass or glazed china, not plastic
unless tested.
Serving size. Extreme care must be given to regulating the precise amount of product to
be given to each subject. Technicians should be carefully trained to deliver the correct
amount of product with the least amount of handling. Special equipment may be advant-
ageous for measuring precise amounts of a product for sensory testing.
Serving matrix. For most difference tests, the product under test is presented on its own,
without additives. Products such as coffee, tea, peanut butter, vegetables, meats, etc., are
served without condiments or other adjuncts that may normally be used by consumers,
such as milk, bread, butter, spices, etc. In contrast, for consumer tests (preference/accep-
tance tests), products should be presented as normally consumed: coffee or tea with milk,
sugar, or lemon, as required; peanut butter with bread or crackers; vegetables and meat
with spices, according to the consumer’s preference. Products which are normally tasted
in or on other products (condiments, dressings, sauces, etc.) should be evaluated in or on a
uniform carrier which does not mask the product characteristics. These include a ﬂour
Controls for Test Room, Products, and Panel
35
