4. On a minor point, the practice of connecting spokes of the spider web can be
misleading to some users, who, because of their technical training, expect the
area under a curve to have some meaning. In reality, the sensory dimensions
shown in the web may be either unrelated to each other or related in ways that
cannot be represented in this manner.
10.4.4
The Spectrume Descriptive Analysis Method
This method, designed by Civille, is described in detail in Chapter 11. Its principal charac-
teristic is that the panelist scores the perceived intensities with reference to pre-learned,
absolute intensity scales. The purpose is to make the resulting proﬁles universally under-
standable and usable, not only at a later date, but also at any laboratory outside the
originating one. The method provides for this purpose an array of standard attribute
names (lexicons), each with its set of standards that deﬁne a scale of intensity, usually
from 0 to 15, that can be measured on a 15 cm line scale or simply recorded as a
straight number.
10.4.5
Time–Intensity Descriptive Analysis
For certain products, the perception’s intensity varies with time over a longer or shorter
period, and an attribute’s time–intensity curve may be a key aspect deﬁning the product
(Larson-Powers and Pangborn 1978; Lee and Pangborn 1986; Overbosch 1986; Overbosch,
van den Enden, and Keur 1986; ASTM 1997b). Long-term time–intensity studies measure
the reduction of skin dryness periodically over several days of a skin lotion’s application. A
lipstick’s color intensity can be periodically evaluated over several hours. Shorter term
time–intensity studies track certain ﬂavor and/or texture attributes of chewing gum over
several minutes. In the shortest term studies, completed within 1–3 min, the response can be
continuously recorded. Examples include the sweetness of sweeteners (IFT 1988; Shamil
et al. 1988), the bitterness of beer (Pangborn, Lewis, and Yamashita 1983; Schmitt et al. 1984;
Leach and Noble 1986), and topical analgesics’ effects. The response may be recorded using
pencil and paper, a scrolling chart recorder (Larson-Powers and Pangborn 1978), or a
computer system (Guinard, Pangborn, and Shoemaker 1985; IFT 1988) that is commercially
available in several versions. The panelist should not see the evolving response curve being
traced because this may result in bias from preconceived notions of its form.
Current methodology of time–intensity research has been comprehensively reviewed by
Lee and Pangborn (1986) and for sweeteners, in particular, by Booth (1989). Important
variables to consider are:
† Protocols for evaluation—type of delivery, amount of product, time to hold in the
mouth, type of manipulation, expectoration, or swallow—need to be
clearly deﬁned.
† Protocols for coordinating product evaluation (sample holding) and response
recording (data entry) need to be worked out in advance to reduce bias from the
mode of presentation.
† Panelists may require several training sessions to develop and learn all of the
protocols necessary for a well-controlled time–intensity study. Figure 10.1 is an
example of the parameters that can be recorded in a time–intensity study; a more
detailed example is given by Lee and Pangborn (1986).
Table 10.1 shows an example of responses obtained with three sweeteners.
Descriptive Analysis Techniques
181
