dependent variable. The variability of y around the line (i.e., vs. ^y) is compared with the
variability of y around its sample mean y (which is the original “expected” value of y) (see
Figure 14.7). This notion is formalized statistically by adding the assumption that the
residuals of the regression analysis are normally distributed, independent of each other,
all with the mean value of zero and the same variance, s2, i.e., 3wn(0, s2). ANOVA can then
be used to determine if a signiﬁcant reduction in unexplained variability is obtained by
using least-squares estimates to predict y based on x. The F-ratio in the ANOVA table for
simple linear regression, such as in Table 14.1, actually tests H0: b1Z0 vs. HA: b1s0, which
is equivalent to the reduction in variability argument stated previously (if b1Z0 then the
line is horizontal and ^yZ y, so no reduction in variability could occur).
Other criteria are used to assess the quality of the regression equation. The coefﬁcient of
determination,
R2 Z 1KSSRes
SSTot
(14.7)
summarizes the proportion of the total variability that is explained by using x to predict y.
SSRes and SSTot in Equation 14.7 are the residual and total ANOVA sums of squares from
Table 14.1, respectively. In sensory evaluation, values of R2 O0.75 are generally considered
to be acceptable. However, whether this is true depends on the intended use of the
regression equation. Other criteria may be more informative. A conﬁdence interval on
b1 can be constructed using
^b1Gta=2;nK2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
MSE=SSx
p
(14.8)
y = b 0 + b 1x
y
Residual vs. y
Residual vs. y
X
Y
FIGURE 14.7
A comparison of the residuals from a ﬁtted regression line with the residuals from y used to determine if the ﬁtted
line signiﬁcantly reduces the amount of unexplained variability in the response. The reduction in the size of the
residuals (i.e., distance from the “expected” value) between ^y vs: y shows that the regression line is a better
summary of the data.
Advanced Statistical Methods
367
