character, ﬂavor strength, mouthfeel—tend to be rated favorably as well. Conversely, if
the product is not well liked, most of the attributes will be rated unfavorably. The
remedy, when any particular variable is important, is to present separate sets of
samples for evaluation of that characteristic.
4.3.6
Order of Presentation of Samples
At least ﬁve types of bias may be caused by the order of presentation.
Contrast effect. Presentation of a sample of good quality just before one of poor
quality may cause the second sample to receive a lower rating than if it had
been rated monadically (i.e., as a single sample). As an example, if one lives in
Minneapolis in the winter and the thermometer hits 408F, the city is having a heat
wave. If one lives in Miami and the thermometer registers 408F, the news media
will report a severe cold spell. The converse is also true: a sample that follows a
particularly poor one will tend to be rated higher.
Group effect. One good sample presented in a group of poor samples will tend to be
rated lower than if presented on its own. This effect is the opposite of the
contrast effect.
Error of central tendency. Samples placed near the center of a set tend to be preferred
over those placed at the ends. In triangle tests, the odd sample is detected more
often if it is in the middle position. (An error of central tendency is also found
with scales and categories; see Chapter 5.)
Pattern effect. Panelists will use all available clues (this, of course, is legitimate on
their part) and are quick to detect any pattern in the order of presentation.
Time error/positional bias. One’s attitude undergoes subtle changes over a series of
tests, from anticipation or even hunger for the ﬁrst sample, to fatigue or indif-
ference with the last. Often, the ﬁrst sample is abnormally preferred (or rejected).
A short-term test (sip and evaluate) will yield a bias for the sample presented
ﬁrst, whereas a long-term test (one-week home placement) will produce a bias
for the sample presented last. Discrimination is greater with the ﬁrst pair in a set
than with subsequent pairs.
All of these effects must be minimized by the use of a balanced, randomized order of
presentation. “Balanced” means that each of the possible combinations is presented an
equal number of times. Each sample in a panel session should appear an equal number of
times in ﬁrst, second . and nth position. If there are large numbers of samples to be
presented, a balanced incomplete block design can be used (see Chapter 7, p. 122 and
Chapter 13, p. 343).
“Randomized” means that the order in which the selected combinations appear was
chosen according to the laws of chance. In practice, randomization is obtained by drawing
sample cards from a bag, or it may be planned with the aid of a compilation of random
numbers (see Table 17.1, p. 419, also Product Controls in Chapter 3, p. 36).
Computer programs for developing balanced randomized serving plans are also avai-
lable, for example, from Qi Statistics (2001).
4.3.7
Mutual Suggestion
The response of a panelist can be inﬂuenced by other panelists. Because of this, panelists
are separated in booths, thus preventing a judge from reacting to the facial expression
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 4
42
