12.1.1
Product Maintenance
In a typical food or personal care company, a large proportion of the product work carried
out by R&D and marketing departments deals with the maintenance of current products,
their market shares, and sales volumes. R&D projects may involve cost reduction, sub-
stitution of ingredients, process and formulation changes, and packaging modiﬁcations, in
each case without affecting the product characteristics and overall acceptance. Sensory
evaluation tests used in such cases are often discrimination tests to assess differences or
similarities among products. However, when a match is not possible, it is necessary to take
one or more “near misses” out to the consumer to determine if these prototypes will at
least achieve parity (in acceptance or preference) with the current product and, perhaps,
with the competition.
Product maintenance is a key issue in quality control/quality assurance and shelf-life/
storage projects. Initially, it is necessary to establish the “affective status” of the standard or
control product with consumers. After this is done, internal tests can be used to measure
the magnitude and type of change over time, condition, production site, raw material
sources, etc. with the aid of QC or storage testing. The sensory differences detected by
internal tests, large and small, may then be evaluated again by consumer testing to
determine how large a difference is sufﬁcient to reduce (or increase) the acceptance
rating or percent preference compared to the control or standard.
12.1.2
Product Improvement/Optimization
Because of the intense competition for shelf space, companies are constantly seeking to
improve and optimize products so that they deliver what the consumer is seeking and
thus fare better than the competition. A product improvement project generally seeks
to “ﬁx” or upgrade one or two key product attributes that consumers have indicated
need improvement. A product optimization project typically attempts to manipulate a
few ingredient or process variables so as to improve the desired attributes and the
overall consumer acceptance. Both types of projects require the use of a good
descriptive panel to (1) verify the initial consumer needs and (2) document the charac-
teristics of the successful prototype. Examples of projects to improve product
attributes are:
† Increasing a key aroma and/or ﬂavor attribute, such as lemon, peanut, coffee,
chocolate, etc.
† Increasing an important texture attribute, such as crisp, moist, etc., or redu-
cing negative properties such as soggy or chalky
† Decreasing a perceived off note (e.g., crumbly dry texture, stale ﬂavor or
aroma, artiﬁcial rather than natural fruit ﬂavor)
† Improving perceived performance characteristics, such as longer lasting
fragrance, brighter shine, more moisturized skin, etc.
In product improvement, prototypes are made, tested by a descriptive or attribute panel
to verify that the desired attribute differences are perceptible, and then tested with consu-
mers to determine the degree of perceived product improvement and its effect on overall
acceptance or preference scores.
For product optimization (Institute of Food Technologists 1979; Moskowitz 1983; Carr
1989; Gacula 1993; Resurreccion 1998; Sidel and Stone 2004) ingredients or process vari-
ables are manipulated; the key sensory attributes affected are identiﬁed by descriptive
Affective Tests: Purpose and Applications
257
