Example 12.7: Case Study: Relating Consumer Qualitative Information with Descriptive
Analysis Data
A manufacturer of sunscreens is developing a new body-lotion-sunscreen product. Results
from the fuzzy front end research indicates that there is a prime opportunity to sell a sunsc-
reenthatfeelslikeamoisturizerbutdeliverstheprotectionofasunscreen.Themanufacturer
is looking for preliminary information and direction for the product developers.
The ﬁrst step is to document a large array (15–30) of hand-lotion products in the market-
place from which a diverse subset of (4–8) are selected for discussion with consumers.
A trained Spectrum descriptive analysis panel documents the skinfeel properties of a
large array (16–20) of lotions from the retail marketplace, thus deﬁning precisely what the
products feel like as they are dispensed in the hand, and on the skin (see Chapter 11).
Figure 12.8 shows the data range for the 16 samples for the initial rubout characteristics.
The descriptive panel results are analyzed using multivariate statistical techniques,
such as principle component analysis. Maps of the data permit the researchers to
look into/onto the whole space that encompasses the commercial hand lotions. From
the map, a diverse subset of ﬁve lotions is selected for discussion with consumers.
Qualitative interviews are conducted with selected consumers. The consumers describe
the optimum lotion-sunscreen as giving the skin a “soft, ﬂexible, cushion, and hydrated”
feeling. These terms are used by the consumers to describe the samples that the descriptive
analysis panel describes as being higher in skin suppleness, lower in skin-texture visibility,
and having more of a silicone feeling than oily or greasy. By considering the known range
of sensory intensities from the original array, the sensory scientists develop a guideline for
intensity, providing a development direction. This is illustrated in Figure 12.9. The product
developers are now able to create prototypes for further testing, whether it is consumer
acceptance, preference, or perception of efﬁcacy.
12.8.5
Key Drivers, Preference Mapping, and Segmentation Analysis
Key drivers analysis applies external preference mapping to identify the sensory attributes
that are most important to consumers and to develop predicted sensory proﬁles of the
Wetness
Spreadability
Thickness
Oil
Wax
Grease
Absorbency
FIGURE 12.8
Data range graph for descriptive analysis rub-out characteristics.
Gloss
Tautness
Stickiness
Moistness
Slipperiness
Occlusion
Suppleness
Dryness/Roughness
Amount of residue
Oil %
Wax %
Grease %
Silicone %
Skin texture visibility
FIGURE 12.9
Suggested direction for afterfeel characteristics.
Affective Tests: Using Other Sensory Methods to Uncover Insights
291
