proportion of distinguishers in the population of panelists, pd, using
Lower confidence limit :
^pdKzasd; and
Upper confidence limit :
^pd Czbsd;
where ^pd is the estimate of the proportion of distinguishers, sd is the sample standard
deviation of the proportion of distinguishers and za and zb are the a and b critical values
from the standard normal distribution. The quantities ^pd and sd are obtained from ^pc and sc
using the following transformations:
Method
^pd
sd
Triangle test
1:5^pcK0:5
1.5sc
Duo–Trio and paired
comparison
2^pcK1
2sc
Two-out-of-ﬁve
ð10=9Þ^pcKð1=9Þ
(10/9)sc
If the lower conﬁdence limit is zero or less, then the null hypothesis of no perceptible
difference cannot be rejected (at the 1Ka conﬁdence level). If the lower conﬁdence limit is
greater than zero, then the samples are perceptibly different. If the upper conﬁdence limit
is less than the proportion of distinguishers that the researcher wants to be able to detect,
pmax, then the products are sufﬁciently similar (at the 1Kb conﬁdence level). If the upper
conﬁdence limit is greater than pmax, then the samples are not sufﬁciently similar. (See
Chapter 6 for examples using these conﬁdence intervals.)
13.3
Statistical Hypothesis Testing
Often, the objective of an investigation is to determine if it is reasonable to assume that the
unknown value of a parameter is equal to some speciﬁed value or possibly that
the unknown values of two parameters are equal to each other. In the face of the incom-
plete and variable information contained in a sample, statistical decisions of this type are
made using hypothesis testing. The process of statistical hypothesis testing is summarized
by the following ﬁve steps:
1. The objective of the investigation is stated in mathematical terms, called the null
hypothesis (H0), (e.g., H0: mZ8).
2. Based on the prior interest of the researcher, another mathematical statement,
called the alternative hypothesis (Ha) is formulated (e.g., Ha: mO8, Ha: m!8, or Ha:
ms8).
3. A sample of elements from the population is collected and the measurement of
interest is taken on each element of the sample.
4. The value of the statistic used to estimate the parameter of interest is calculated.
5. Based on the assumed probability distribution of the measurements and the null
hypothesis assumption, H0, the probability that the statistic takes on the value
calculated in step 4 is computed. If this probability is smaller than some prede-
termined
value
(a),
the
null-hypothesis
is
rejected
in
favor
of
the
alternative hypothesis.
Basic Statistical Methods
323
