chew, one manual squeeze), the subject induces the manifestation of only a limited number
of attributes (hardness, denseness, deformation) at a time (Civille and Liska 1975).
However, with the chemical senses (aroma and ﬂavor), the chemical composition of the
sample and some of its physical properties (temperature, volume, concentration) may alter
the order in which certain attributes are detected (IFT 1981). In some products such as
beverages, the order of appearance of the characteristics is often as indicative of the
product proﬁle as the individual aroma and ﬂavor notes and their respective intensities.
Included as part of the treatment of the order of appearance of attributes is aftertaste or
afterfeel that are those attributes that can still be perceived after the product or sample has
been used or consumed. A complete picture of a product requires that all characteristics
that are perceived after the product use should be individually mentioned and rated
for intensity.
Attributes described and rated for aftertaste or afterfeel do not necessarily imply a
defect or negative note. For example, the cool aftertaste of a mouthwash or breath mint
is a necessary and desirable property. On the other hand, a cola beverage’s metallic
aftertaste may indicate a packaging contamination or a problem with a particular
sweetener.
When the intensity of one or more (usually not more than three) sensory properties is
repeatedly tracked across a designated time span, the technique is called time–intensity
analysis. A more detailed description of this technique is given on p. 181 of this chapter.
10.3.4
Overall Impression: The Integrated Aspect
In addition to the detection and description of the qualitative, quantitative, and time
factors that deﬁne the sensory characteristics of a product, panelists are capable of, and
management is often interested in, some integrated assessment of the product properties.
Ways such integration has been attempted include the following four:
Total intensity of aroma or ﬂavor. A measure of the overall impact (intensity) of all the
aroma components (perceived volatiles) or a measure of the overall ﬂavor impact that
includes the aromatics, tastes, and feeling factors contributing to the ﬂavor. Such an
evaluation can be important in determining the general fragrance or ﬂavor impact that
a product delivers to the consumer who does not normally understand all of the nuances
of the contributing odors or tastes that the panel describes. The components of texture are
more functionally discrete, and “total texture” is not a property that can be determined.
Balance/blend (amplitude). A well-trained descriptive panel is often asked to assess the
degree to which various ﬂavor or aroma characteristics ﬁt together in the product. Such an
evaluation involves a sophisticated understanding, half learned and half intuitive, of
the appropriateness of the various attributes, their relative intensity in the complex, and
the way(s) they harmonize in the complex. Evaluation of balance or blend (or amplitude as
it is called in the Flavor Proﬁle method [Cairncross and Sjo¨strom 1950; Caul 1957; Keane
1992]) is difﬁcult even for the highly trained panelist and should not be attempted with
naı¨ve or less sophisticated subjects. In addition, care must be taken in the use of data on
balance or blend. Often a product is not intended to be blended or balanced: a preponder-
ance of spicy aromatics or toasted notes may be essential to the full character of a product.
In some products, the consumer may not appreciate a balanced composition, despite its
well-proportioned notes, as determined by the trained panel. Therefore, it is important to
understand the relative importance of blend or balance among consumers for the product
in question before measuring and/or using such data.
Overall difference. In certain product situations, the key decisions involve determination
of the relative differences between samples and some control or standard product.
Although the statistical analysis of differences between products on individual attributes
Descriptive Analysis Techniques
177
