Table 15.1
Continued
Type of Problem
Tests Applicable
15. Threshold of added substances: required (1) in trouble-shooting to
conﬁrm suspected source(s) of off-ﬂavor(s); (2) to develop
background knowledge of the chemical cause(s) of sensory
attributes and consumer preferences
Chapter 8
Note:
In 3–5, if new product is different, descriptive tests (Table 15.5) may be useful to characterize the difference.
If the difference is found to be in a single attribute, attribute difference tests (Table 15.3) are the tools to use in
further work.
TABLE 15.2
Area of Application of Overall Difference Tests: Does a Sensory Difference Exist
between Samples?
The tests in this table are suitable for applications such as:
1. To determine whether any product differences result from a change in ingredients, processing,
packaging or storage
2. To determine whether an overall difference exists, where no speciﬁc attribute(s) can be identiﬁed as
having been affected
3. To determine whether two samples are sufﬁciently similar to be used interchangeably
4. To select and train panelists and to monitor their ability to discriminate between test samples
Test
Areas of Application
1. Triangle test
Two samples not visibly different; one of the most-used difference tests;
statistically efﬁcient, but somewhat affected by sensory fatigue and memory
effects; generally 20–40 subjects, can be used with as few as 5–8 subjects;
brief training required
2. Duo–trio test
Two samples not visibly different; test has low statistical efﬁciency, but is less
affected by fatigue than the Triangle test: useful where product well known
to subjects can be employed as the reference; generally 30 or more subjects,
can be used with as few as 12–15; brief training required
3. Two-out-of-ﬁve
test
Two samples without obvious visible differences; statistically highly efﬁcient,
but strongly affected by sensory fatigue, hence use limited to visual,
auditory, and tactile applications; generally 8–12 subjects, can be used with
as few as 5; brief training required
4. Same/Different
test (also called
Simple
Difference test)
Two samples not visibly different; test has low statistical efﬁciency, but is
suitable for samples of strong or lingering ﬂavor, samples which need to be
applied to the skin in half-face tests, and samples which are very complex
stimuli and therefore confusing to the subjects; generally 30 or more
subjects, can be used with as few as 12–15; brief training required
5. “A”–“not A” test
As for number 4, but used where one of the samples has importance as a
standard or reference product, is familiar to the subjects, or essential to
the project as the current sample against which all other samples are
measured
6. Degree of
Difference test,
also called
Difference-from-
Control test
Two samples which may show slight visual differences such as are caused
by the normal heterogeneity of meats, vegetables, salads, and baked
goods; test is used where the size of the difference affects a decision
about the test objective, e.g., in quality control and storage studies;
generally 30–50 presentations of the sample pair; moderate amount of
training required
(continued)
Guidelines for Choice of Technique
409
