2.2.4
Flavor
Flavor, as an attribute of foods, beverages, and seasonings, has been deﬁned (Amerine,
Pangborn, and Roessler 1965, 549) as the sum of perceptions resulting from stimulation of
the sense ends that are grouped together at the entrance of the alimentary and respiratory
tracts. However, for purposes of practical sensory analysis, Caul (1957) is followed, and
the term is restricted to the impressions perceived via the chemical senses from a product
in the mouth. Deﬁned in this manner, ﬂavor includes:
† The aromatics, i.e., olfactory perceptions caused by volatile substances released
from a product in the mouth via the posterior nares
† The tastes, i.e., gustatory perceptions (salty, sweet, sour, bitter) caused by soluble
substances in the mouth
† The chemical feeling factors that stimulate nerve ends in the soft membranes of
the buccal and nasal cavities (astringency, spice heat, cooling, bite, metallic
ﬂavor, umami taste)
A large number of individual ﬂavor words are listed in Chapter 11 and in Civille and
Lyon (1996).
2.2.5
Noise
The noise produced during mastication offoods or handling offabrics or paper products is a
minor, but not negligible, sensory attribute. It is common to measure the pitch, loudness,
and persistence of sounds produced by foods or fabrics. The pitch and loudness of the
sound contribute to the overall sensory impression. Differences in pitch of some rupturing
foods (crispy, crunchy, brittle) provide sensory input that is used in the assessment of
freshness/staleness. Oscilloscopic measurements by Vickers and Bourne (1976) permitted
sharp differentiation between products described as crispy and those described as crunchy.
Kinesthetically, these differences correspond to measurable differences in hardness, dense-
ness, and the force of rupture (fracturability) of a product. A crackly or crisp sound on
handling can cause a subject to expect stiffness in a fabric. The duration or persistence of
sound from a product often suggests other properties, e.g., strength (crisp fabric), freshness
(crisp apples, potato chips), toughness (squeaky clams), or thickness (plopping liquid).
Table 2.2 lists common noise characteristics of foods, skincare products, and fabrics.
TABLE 2.2
Common Noise Characteristics of Foods, Skincare Products, and
Fabrics
Noise Propertiesa
Foods
Skincare
Fabrics
Crispy
Squeak
Crisp
Crunchy
Crackle
Squeak
Squeak
Pitch: Frequency of sound.
Loudness: Intensity of sound.
Persistence: Endurance of sound over time.
a Perceived sounds (pitch, loudness, persistence) and auditory measurement.
Sensory Attributes and the Way We Perceive Them
11
