10
Descriptive Analysis Techniques
10.1
Deﬁnition
All descriptive analysis methods involve the detection (discrimination) and the descrip-
tion of both the qualitative and quantitative sensory aspects of a product by trained panels
of 5–100 judges (subjects). Smaller panels of ﬁve to ten subjects are used for the typical
product on the grocery shelf, whereas, the larger panels are used for products of mass
production where small differences can be very important, i.e., beers and soft drinks.
Panelists must be able to detect and describe the perceived sensory attributes of a
sample. These qualitative aspects of a product combine to deﬁne the product and
include all of the appearance, aroma, ﬂavor, texture, or sound properties of a product
that differentiate it from others. In addition, panelists must learn to differentiate and rate
the quantitative or intensity aspects of a sample and to deﬁne to what degree each charac-
teristic or qualitative note is present in that sample. Two products may contain the same
qualitative descriptors, but they may markedly differ in the intensity of each, therefore,
resulting in quite different and easily distinctive sensory proﬁles or pictures of each
product. The two samples below have the same qualitative descriptors, but they substan-
tially differ in the amount of each characteristic (quantitatively). The numbers used
represent intensity ratings on a 15-cm line scale where a zero means no detectable
amount of the attribute and a 15 means a very large amount (Civille 1979).
The two samples (385 and 408) below are commercially available potato chips.
Characteristic
385
408
Fried potato
7.5
4.8
Raw potato
1.1
3.7
Vegetable oil
3.6
1.1
Salty
6.2
13.5
Sweet
2.2
1.0
Although these two samples of chips have the same attribute descriptors, they markedly
differ by virtue of the intensity of each ﬂavor note. Sample 385 has distinct fried potato
character with underlying oil, sweet, and raw potato notes. Sample 408 is dominated by
saltiness with the potato, oil, and sweet notes of lower impact.
10.2
Field of Application
Use descriptive tests to obtain detailed description of the aroma, ﬂavor, and oral texture of
foods and beverages, skinfeel of personal care products, handfeel of fabrics and paper
173
