The quantitative and qualitative techniques employed can be executed independent of
each other or in combination. Three scenarios for rapid prototyping and the testing plan
are as follows.
In Scenario 1, a group of target respondents are recruited to participate in focus groups
on toothbrushes over a period of time. Two to four groups are conducted at one time point
with respondents returning to participate in three to four successive rounds of testing.
Each round focuses on either a new facet of the toothbrush such as the number, length, and
stiffness of the bristles, or the size and shape of the handle. The groups focus on sensory
properties with numerous stimuli presented to represent ranges of intensities for various
attributes. Product developers, marketers, and sensory professionals viewing from the
back room listen for sensory cues for product improvement. Ideas are taken back to the
laboratory for creation of new prototypes.
Scenario 2 involves quantitative testing where a small number of consumers
(nZ50–75) are either recruited from the mall or prerecruited to participate in small-
scale taste tests on sweet and savory crackers. Respondents taste a series of 5–6 crackers
that represent different levels of sweet impression and savory character. At the end of the
tasting, short one-on-one interviews are conducted that allow respondents to verbalize
their thoughts on the crackers. Utilizing electronic data-collection techniques, information
is turned around rapidly and reviewed with the comments from the interviews. Product
development is able to modify the prototypes that highlight consumer’s response. This
process is repeated three to four more times on a shortened cycle until measurable
improvements are found in the products.
Scenario 3 uses community narratives or story telling as an approach. There is a desire to
create a new or improved teen beverage that provides energy, nutritional value, and
replaces lost nutrients, and can be consumed during practice and games. A group of
10–15 teens who participate in sports are recruited for a two-month testing program.
One day per week, the teens go to a facility for two hours. The two-hour block of time
is divided into thirds, with one-third spent meeting or congregating to talk about their
needs and wants, the second-third spent exercising, and the ﬁnal third spent tasting and
discussing the products. This method develops a sense of community, allowing the teens
to build off each other and provide feedback in a real-world setting.
Utilizing rapid prototype development means talking to consumers on a regular, ongoing
basis; this allows them to provide constant feedback. Although it is a more hands-on
approach, it provides direct feedback and the ability to clarify responses in a rapid manner.
12.8.4
Sequence Mapping
Sequence mapping was developed as a tool to incorporate the entire consumer product
experience, including decision making, purchase behavior, product usage, emotions, and
the sensory properties, into a complete story. Through the application of a series of quali-
tative approaches with individuals who meet the deﬁned target group, such as acceptors,
rejectors, or lead-users, detailed information is gathered and a product experience map is
developed. The techniques often included in the development of a sequence map are
diaries, point-of-purchase interviews, observational research, one-on-one interviews,
focus groups, and community narratives. The end result of a sequence map is a
merging of the thoughts, emotions, actions, and perceived sensory properties throughout
the product lifecycle from early decision making to disposal.
Example 12.6: Case Study: Creation of a Sequence Map
A leading manufacturer wants to create a product for women aged 24–50 years who have
an on-the-go lifestyle. These individuals desire a sweet treat as part of a healthy-living
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
288
