As with the triangle test, the two-out-of-ﬁve test is effective in certain situations:
1. To determine whether product differences result from a change in ingredients,
processing, packaging, or storage.
2. To determine whether an overall difference exists, where no speciﬁc attribute(s)
can be identiﬁed as having been affected.
3. To select and monitor panelists for ability to discriminate given differences in test
situations where sensory fatigue effects are small.
6.5.2
Principle of the Test
Present to each subject ﬁve coded samples. Instruct subjects that two samples belong to
one type and three to another. Ask the subjects to taste (feel, view, examine) each product
from left to right and select the two samples that are different from the other three. Count
the number of correct replies and refer to Table 17.14 for interpretation.
6.5.3
Test Subjects
Select, train, and instruct the subjects as described on p. 66. Generally, 10–20 subjects are
used. As few as ﬁve to six may be used when differences are large and easy to identify. Use
only trained subjects.
6.5.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see p. 66. Offer samples simultaneously if possible;
however, samples that are bulky or show slight differences in appearance may be offered
sequentially without invalidating the test. If the number of subjects is other than 20, select
the combinations at random from the following, taking equal numbers of combinations
with 3 A’s and 3 B’s:
AAABB
ABABA
BBBAA
BABAB
AABAB
BAABA
BBABA
ABBAB
ABAAB
ABBAA
BABBA
BAABB
BAAAB
BABAA
ABBBA
ABABB
AABBA
BBAAA
BBAAB
AABBB
An example of a scoresheet is given in Figure 6.9. Count the number of correct responses
and the number of total responses and refer to Table 17.14. Do not count “no difference”
responses; subjects must guess if in doubt.
Example 6.8: Comparing Textiles for Roughness
Problem/situation: A textile manufacturer wishes to replace an existing polyester fabric with
a polyester/nylon blend. He has received a complaint that the polyester/nylon blend has
a rougher and scratchier surface.
Project objective: To determine whether the polyester/nylon blend needs to be modiﬁed
because it is too rough.
Test objective: To obtain a measure of the relative difference in surface feel between the
two fabrics.
Test design: As sensory fatigue is not a large factor, the two-out-of-ﬁve test is the most
efﬁcient for assessing differences. A small panel of 12 will be able to detect quite small
differences. Choose, at random, 12 combinations of the two fabrics from the table of 20
Overall Difference Tests: Two-out-of-Five Test
81
