12.8.2
Using Affective Data to Deﬁne Shelf-Life or Quality Limits
In Chapter 11, pp. 193–194, a “modiﬁed” or short-version descriptive procedure is
provided in which the principal use is to deﬁne QA/QC or shelf-life limits. In a typical
case, the ﬁrst step is to send the fresh product out for an acceptability test in a typical user
group. This initial questionnaire may contain additional questions asking the consumer to
rate a few important attributes.
The product is also rated for acceptability and key attributes by the modiﬁed panel, and
this evaluation is repeated at regular intervals during the shelf storage period, each time
comparing the stored product with a control that may be the same product stored under
conditions that inhibit perceptible deterioration (e.g., deep-freeze storage under nitrogen)
or, if this is not possible, fresh product of current production.
When a signiﬁcant difference is found by the modiﬁed panel, in overall difference from
the control and/or in some major attribute(s), the samples are sent again to the user group
to determine if the statistically signiﬁcant difference is meaningful to the consumer. This is
repeated as the difference grows with time of shelf storage. After the size of a panel
difference can be related to what reduces consumer acceptance or preference, the internal
panel can be used in the future to monitor regular production in shelf-life studies, with
assurance that the results are predictive of consumer reaction.
Example 12.5: Shelf Life of Sesame Cracker
Problem/situation. A company wishes to deﬁne the shelf life of a new sesame cracker in
terms of the “sell by” date that will be printed on packages on the day of production.
Project objective. To determine at what point during shelf storage the product will be
considered “off,” “stale,” or “not fresh” by the consumer.
Test objective. (1) Use a research panel trained for the purpose of determining the key
attributes of the product at various points during shelf storage and (2) submit the product
to consumer acceptance tests (a) initially; (b) when the research panel ﬁrst establishes a
difference; and (c) at intervals thereafter, until the consumers establish a difference.
Test design. Samples of a single batch of the sesame crackers were held for 2, 4, 6, 8, and
12 weeks under four different sets of conditions: “control”Znear freezing in airtight
containers; “ambient”Z708F and 50% RH; “humid”Z858F and 70% RH; and “hot”Z
1008F and 30% RH.
Subjects. Twenty-ﬁve panelists from the R&D lab are selected for ability to recognize the
aromatics of stale sesame crackers, i.e., the cardboard aromatic of the stale base cracker and
thepaintyaromaticofoxidizedoilfromtheseeds.Twohundredandﬁftyconsumersmustbe
users of snack crackers and are chosen demographically to represent the target population.
Sensory methods. The research panel used the questionnaire in Figure 12.6 and was trained
to score the test samples on the seven line scales that represent key attributes of appearance,
ﬂavor, and texture related to the shelf life of crackers and sesame seeds. Research panelists
also received a sample marked “control” with instructions to use the last line of the form as a
difference-from-control test (see Chapter 6, Section 8). The panelists were informed that
these samples were part of a shelf-life study and that occasional test samples would consist
of freshly prepared “control product” (such information reduces the tendency of panelists
in shelf-life testing to anticipate more and more degradation in products).
On each occasion, the consumers received two successive coded samples (the test
product and the control, in random order), each with the score sheet in Figure 12.7 that
they completed immediately and returned to the interviewer.
Analyze results. The initial acceptance test, in which the 250 consumers received two
fresh samples, provided a baseline rating of 7.2 for both, and the accompanying attribute
ratings indicated that the crackers were perceived fresh and crisp.
Affective Tests: Using Other Sensory Methods to Uncover Insights
285
