the method is also called the paired comparison test or the 2-AFC (2-alternative forced
choice) test. It is one of the simplest and most used sensory tests that is often used ﬁrst to
determine if other more sophisticated tests should be applied. Other forms of paired
comparisons of two samples are the same/different test (see Chapter 6, p. 84) and the
paired preference test (see Chapter 12, p. 274).
When using a paired comparison test, it is necessary from the outset to distinguish
between two-sided applications (bilateral, the most common) and one-sided applications
(unilateral, when only one reply is of interest or only one reply is correct). (See Chapter 13,
p. 324 and the note on p. 108).
The uniﬁed approach also applies to the paired comparison test. The number of respon-
dents required for the test is affected by (1) whether the test is one-sided (use Table 7.9) or
two-sided (use Table 7.11); and (2) by the values chosen for the test-sensitivity parameters
a, b, and pmax. In paired comparison tests, the parameter pmax replaces the parameter pd
from the overall difference methods discussed in Chapter 6. pmax is the departure from
equal intensity (i.e., a 50:50 split of opinion among respondents) that represents a mean-
ingful difference to the researcher. For example, if the researcher considers a 60:40 split in
the population of respondents to be a meaningfully large departure from equal intensity,
then pmaxZ0.60 and the researcher ﬁnds the number of respondents in that section of the
appropriate Table 7.9 or Table 7.11 for the chosen values of a and b. As a rule of thumb:
† pmax!55% represents small departures from equal intensity
† 55%%pmax%65% represents medium departures
† pmaxO65% represents large departures
7.2.2
Principle
Present to each subject two coded samples. Prepare equal numbers of the combinations AB
and BA and allot them at random among the subjects. Ask the subject to taste the products
from left to right and ﬁll in the scoresheet. Clearly inform the subject whether “no
difference” verdicts are permitted.
Only the “forced choice technique” is amenable to formal statistical analysis. However,
in some cases subjects may object quite strenuously to inventing a difference when none is
perceived. The sensory analyst must then decide whether to (1) divide their scores evenly
over the two samples or (2) ignore them. Procedure (1) decreases the probability of ﬁnding
a difference while procedure (2) increases it; hence, the analyst must face the temptation to
inﬂuence the results one way or the other. In practice, about one-half of analysts prohibit
“no difference” verdicts. The other half, having found that a happy panel is a better panel,
most frequently use procedure (1).
7.2.3
Test Subjects
Because of the simplicity of the test, it can be conducted with subjects who have received
a minimum of training; it is sufﬁcient that subjects are completely familiar with the attri-
bute under test. Or, if a test is of particular importance (e.g., an off-ﬂavor in a product
already on the market), highly trained subjects may be selected who have shown special
acuity for the attribute.
Because the chance of guessing is 50%, fairly large numbers of test subjects are required.
Table 7.12 shows that, e.g., with 15 presentations, 13 must agree if a signiﬁcance level of
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 7
106
