13
Basic Statistical Methods
13.1
Introduction
The goal of applied statistics is to draw some conclusion about a population based on the
information contained in a sample from that population. The types of conclusions fall into
two general categories: estimates and inferences. Furthermore, the size and manner in
which a sample is drawn from a population affects the precision and accuracy of the
resulting estimates and inferences. These issues are addressed in the experimental
design of a sensory study. This chapter presents the concepts and techniques of estimation,
inference, and experimental design as they relate to some of the more fundamental statisti-
cal methods used in sensory evaluation. The topics are presented with a minimum of
theoretical detail. Those interested in pursuing this area further are encouraged to read
Gacula and Singh (1984), O’Mahony (1986), and Smith (1988) or, for more theoretically
advanced presentations, Cochran and Cox (1957) and Snedecor and Cochran (1980).
Several deﬁnitions presented at this point will make the discussion that follows easier to
understand. A population is the entire collection of elements of interest. The population of
interest in sensory analysis varies from study to study. In some cases, the population may
be people (e.g., consumers of a particular food), whereas in other cases it may be products
(e.g., batches of corn syrup). An element or unit from the population might be a particular
consumer or a particular batch of syrup. Measurements taken on elements from a popu-
lation may be discrete, i.e., take on only speciﬁc values (such as a preference for brand A),
or continuous, i.e., take on any value on a continuum (such as the intensity of sweetness).
The values that the measurements take on are governed by a probability distribution,
usually expressed in the form of a mathematical equation that relates the occurrence of
a speciﬁc value to the probability of that occurrence. Associated with the distribution are
certain ﬁxed quantities called parameters. The values of the parameters provide infor-
mation about the population. For continuous distributions, for instance, the mean (m)
locates the center of the measurements. The standard deviation (s) measures the dis-
persion or “spread” of the measurements about the mean. For discrete distributions, the
proportion of the population that possesses a certain characteristic is of interest. For
example, the population proportion (p) of a binomial distribution might summarize the
distribution of preferences for two products.
Only in the rarest of circumstances is it possible to conduct a census of the population
and directly compute the exact values of the population parameters. More typically, a
subset of the elements of the population, called a sample, is collected, and the measure-
ments of interest are made on each element in the sample. Mathematical functions of
these measurements, called statistics, are used to approximate the unknown values of
the population parameters. The value of a statistic is called an estimate.
313
