registered by another judge. Vocalizing an opinion in reaction to samples is not permitted.
The testing area also should be free from noise and distraction and separate from the
preparation area.
4.3.8
Lack of Motivation
The degree of effort a panelist will make to discern a subtle difference, to search for the
proper term for a given impression, or to be consistent in assigning scores is of decisive
importance for the results. It is the responsibility of the panel leader to create an atmos-
phere in which assessors feel comfortable and do a good job. An interested panelist is
always more efﬁcient. Motivation is best in a well-understood, well-deﬁned test situation.
The interest of panelists can be maintained by giving them reports of their results. Pane-
lists should be made to feel that the panels are an important activity. This can be subtly
accomplished by running the tests in a controlled, efﬁcient manner.
4.3.9
Capriciousness vs. Timidity
Some people tend to use the extremes of any scale, thereby exerting more than their share
of inﬂuence over the panel’s results. Others tend to stick to the central part of the scale and
to minimize differences between samples. To obtain reproducible, meaningful results, the
panel leader should monitor new panelists’ scores on a daily basis, giving guidance in
the form of typical samples already evaluated by the panel and, if necessary, using
doctored samples as illustrations.
4.4
Poor Physical Condition
Panelists should be excused from sessions: (1) if they suffer from fever or the common
cold, in the case of tasters, and if they suffer from skin or nervous system disorders in the
case of a tactile panel; (2) if they suffer from poor dental hygiene or gingivitis; and (3) in
the case of emotional upset or heavy pressure of work that prevents them from concen-
trating (conversely, panel work can be an oasis in a frantic day). Smokers can be good
tasters but should refrain from smoking for 30–60 min before a panel. Strong coffee
paralyzes the palate for up to an hour. Tasting should not take place the ﬁrst 2 h after a
major meal. The optimal time for panel work (for persons on the day shift) is between
10:00 a.m. and lunch. Generally, the best time for an individual panelist depends on his
biorhythm: it is that time of the day when one is most awake and one’s mental powers are
at their peak. Matthes (1986) reviews the many ways in which health or nutrition disorders
affect sensory function and, conversely, how sensory defects can be used in the diagnosis
of health or nutrition disorders.
References
M.A. Amerine, R.M. Pangborn, and E.B. Roessler. 1965. Principles of Sensory Evaluation of Food,
New York: Academic Press.
R.A.M. Gregson. 1963. “The effect of psychological conditions on preference for taste mixtures,” Food
Technology, 17:3, 44.
H.T. Lawless and H. Heymann. 1998. Sensory Evaluation of Food: Principles and Practices, New York:
Chapman & Hall.
Factors Inﬂuencing Sensory Verdicts
43
