7.3
Pairwise Ranking Test: Friedman Analysis—Comparing Several
Samples in All Possible Pairs
7.3.1
Scope and Application
Use this method when the test objective is to compare several samples for a single attri-
bute, e.g., sweetness, freshness, or preference. The test is particularly useful for sets of
three to six samples that are to be evaluated by a relatively inexperienced panel. It arranges
the samples on a scale of intensity of the chosen attribute and provides a numerical
indication of the differences between samples and the signiﬁcance of such differences.
7.3.2
Principle of the Test
Present to each subject one pair at a time in random order, with the question: “Which
sample is sweeter?” (fresher, preferred, etc.). Continue until each subject has evaluated all
possible pairs that can be formed from the samples. Evaluate the results by a Friedman-
type statistical analysis.
7.3.3
Test Subjects
Select, train, and instruct subjects as described on p. 66. Use no fewer than 10 subjects;
discrimination is much improved if 20 or more can be used. Ascertain that subjects can
recognize the attribute of interest, e.g., by training with various pairs of known intensity
difference in the attribute. Depending on the test objective, subjects may be required who
have proven ability to detect small differences in the attribute.
7.3.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see pp. 25 and 34. Offer samples simultaneously if
possible, or else sequentially. Refer to p. 66 for details of procedure. Make certain that the
order of presentation is truly random: subjects must not be led to expect a regular pattern,
as this will inﬂuence verdicts.
Randomize presentation within pairs, between pairs, and among subjects. Ask only one
question: “Which sample is more .?” Do not permit “no difference” verdicts; if they
nevertheless occur, distribute the votes evenly among the samples.
Example 7.3: Mouthfeel of Corn Syrup
Problem/situation: A manufacturer of blended table syrups wishes to market a product with
low thickness at a given solids content. Four unﬂavored corn syrup blends, A, B, C, and D,
have been prepared for evaluation (Carr 1985).
Project objective: To evaluate the suitability of the four syrup blends.
Test objective: To establish the positions of the four blends on a subjective scale of
perceived mouthfeel thickness.
Test design: The pairwise ranking test with Friedman analysis is chosen because
(1) paired presentation is less affected by fatigue with these samples, and (2) this test
establishes a meaningful scale. Twelve subjects of proven ability evaluate the six possible
pairs AB, AC, AD, BC, BD, and CD. The worksheet and the scoresheet are shown in
Figure 7.2 and Figure 7.3, respectively.
Attribute Difference Tests: Pairwise Ranking Test
109
