the experimental error of the population of products. Often, measurement error, that is,
judge-to-judge variability, is substituted for experimental error in the statistical analysis
of sensory panel data. This is a very dangerous mistake because ignoring experimental
error and replacing it with measurement error can lead an analyst to falsely conclude
that signiﬁcant differences exist among the products when, in fact, no such differences
exist. Evaluating a single batch of product ignores the batch-to-batch differences that
may contribute substantially to product variability. Just as repeated measurements of
one individual’s height tell us nothing about person-to-person differences, repeated
evaluations of a single sample (regardless of the size of the panel) tell us nothing
about product batch-to-batch variability.
Measurement error is real (as sensory professionals are well aware). However, measure-
ment error cannot be casually substituted for experimental error without incurring the
large risk of obtaining misleading results from statistical analyses. If in a taste test, the
contents of one jar of mayonnaise are divided into 20 servings and presented to panelists,
or a single preparation of a sweetener solution is poured into 20 cups and served, then the
results of the test are equivalent to the repeated measurements of an individual’s height.
The variability estimate obtained from the study estimates measurement error. It is not a
measure of the product variability (the valid experimental error) because the independent
replicates (e.g., different batches) of the product were not presented. The only legitimate
conclusion that could be drawn from such a study is whether the panelists were able to
detect differences among the particular samples they evaluated. This is not the same as
concluding that the products are different because there is no way to assess how constant
any of the observed differences would be in future evaluations of different batches of the
same products.
To avoid confusing independent replications of a treatment with multiple observations,
the sensory analyst must have a clear understanding of what population is being studied.
If the objective of a study is to compare several brands of a product, then several units from
each brand must be evaluated. If an ingredient is known to be extremely uniform, then at
the very least, separate preparations of samples with that ingredient should be served to
each judge. (For extremely uniform products, the major source of variability may well be
the preparation-to-preparation differences).
Suggesting that only one sample be taken from each jar of product or that each serving
be prepared separately is undeniably more inconvenient than taking multiple obser-
vations on a single jar. However, the sensory analyst must compare this inconvenience
to the price paid when, for instance, a new product fails in the market because a prototype
formulation was falsely declared to be signiﬁcantly superior to a current formulation
based on the evaluation of a single batch of each product.
13.5.2
Blocking an Experimental Design
The blocking structure of an experimental design is a description of how the treatments
are applied to the experimental material. To understand blocking structure, two concepts
must be understood: the “block” and the “experimental unit.” A block is simply a group of
homogeneous experimental material. Theoretically, any unit within a block will yield the
same response to the application of a given treatment. The level of the response may vary
from block to block, but the difference between any two treatments applied within a block
is constant for all blocks. The experimental material within a block is divided into small
groups called experimental units. An experimental unit is that portion of the total experi-
mental material to which a treatment is independently applied.
The sensitivity of a study is increased by taking into account the block-to-block varia-
bility that is known to exist prior to running the experiment. If the treatments are applied
Basic Statistical Methods
339
