3.2.4.3
Construction Materials
The materials used in the construction and furnishing of a sensory evaluation laboratory
must be in accordance with the speciﬁc environment required for the products to be
evaluated in the laboratory.
Nonodorous. Paper, fabric, carpeting, porous tile, etc., must be avoided because they are
either odorous in themselves or may harbor dirt, molds, etc. that will emit odor. Construc-
tion materials must be smooth, easy to clean, and nonabsorbent so that they do not retain
odors from previous sessions. The materials that best meet these requirements are stain-
less steel, Teﬂon, and Formica. Nonodorous vinyl laminate is suitable for ceilings, walls,
and ﬂoors.
Color. A neutral, unobtrusive color scheme using off-white colors and few patterns
provides a background which is nondistracting to panelists. Especially for countertops,
it is important to choose a color that does not confound or bias evaluations. A white paper
or fabric on a black benchtop will show visual ﬂaws more dramatically, thus biasing both
visual and tactile evaluations.
Plumbing. Product trapped in pipes causes distracting and confounding odors in
a sensory laboratory. It is essential that all pipes and drains open to the room can be
cleaned and ﬂushed. If spit sinks are necessary for some tests (toothpaste, mouthwash),
thought should be given to having them detachable, i.e., connected by ﬂexible hose to
water inlet and drain. When the sinks are not in use, they can be stored separately and the
pipes can be closed off with caps.
3.3
Product Controls
3.3.1
General Equipment
When a sensory evaluation test is conducted, the product researcher and the sensory
analyst are looking for some treatment effect: effect of an ingredient change, a processing
variable, a packaging change, a storage variable, etc. One of the primary responsibilities of
the sensory analyst is to control the early handling, the preparation, and the presentation
for each product. These controls ensure that extraneous variables are not introduced, and
that no real treatment variables are obscured.
The preparation area should be situated adjacent to the test area. However, the air
handling system should be structured so that the test area has positive pressure that
feeds into the preparation area, which in turn contains the air return system as well as
a supplementary exhaust.
3.3.2
Sample Preparation
3.3.2.1
Supplies and Equipment
In addition to the necessary major appliances, the controlled preparation of products
requires adequate supplies and equipment, such as
† Scales, for weighing products and ingredients.
† Glassware, for measurement and storage of products.
† Timers, for monitoring of preparation procedures.
† Stainless steel equipment, for mixing and storing products, etc.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 3
34
