TABLE 15.1
Types of Problems Encountered in Sensory Analysis
Type of Problem
Tests Applicable
1. New product development: the product development team needs
information on the sensory characteristics and also on consumer
acceptability of experimental products as compared with existing
products in the market
All tests in this book
2. Product matching: here, the accent is on proving that no difference
exists between an existing and a developmental product
Difference tests in similarity
mode, Chapter 6
3. Product improvement: step 1: deﬁne exactly what sensory
characteristics need improvement; step 2: determine that the
experimental product is indeed different; step 3: conﬁrm that the
experimental product is liked better than the control
All difference tests,
Table 15.2; then affective
tests, Table 15.4; see note
4. Process change: step 1: conﬁrm that no difference exists; step 2: if a
difference does exist, determine how consumers view the difference
Difference tests in similarity
mode, Chapter 6; affective
tests, Table 15.4; see note
5. Cost reduction and/or selection of new source of supply: step 1:
conﬁrm that no difference exists; step 2: if a difference does exist,
determine how consumers view the difference
Difference tests in similarity
mode, Chapter 6; affective
tests, Table 15.4; see note
6. Quality control: products sampled during production, distribution,
and marketing are tested to ensure that they are as good as the
standard; descriptive tests (well-trained panel) can monitor many
attributes simultaneously
Difference tests, Table 15.2;
descriptive tests, Table 15.5
7. Storage stability: testing of current and experimental products after
standard aging tests; step 1: ascertain when difference becomes
noticeable; step 2: descriptive tests (well-trained panel) can monitor
many attributes simultaneously; step 3: affective tests can determine
the relative acceptance of stored products
Difference tests, Table 15.2;
descriptive tests.
Table 15.5; affective tests,
Table 15.4
8. Product grading or rating: used where methods of grading exist
which have been accepted by agreement between producer and
user, often with government supervision
Grading, Chapter 5
9. Uncovering consumer needs before product concept and product
development
Fuzzy front end techniques,
Chapter 12
10. Understanding consumer language, product usage and initial
product prototype responses
Focus groups, Chapter 12
11. Consumer acceptance and/or opinions: after laboratory screening, it
may be desirable to submit product to a central-location or home-
placement test to determine consumer reaction; acceptance tests will
indicate whether the current product can be marketed, or
improvement is needed
Affective tests, Table 15.4;
Chapter 12
12. Consumer preference: full-scale consumer preference tests are the
last step before test marketing; employee preference studies cannot
replace consumer tests, but can reduce their number and cost
whenever the desirability of key attributes of the product is known
from previous consumer tests
Affective tests, Table 15.4;
Chapter 12
13. Panelist selection and training: an essential activity for any panel;
may consist of (1) interview; (2) sensitivity tests; (3) difference tests;
and (4) descriptive tests
Chapter 9
14. Correlation of sensory with chemical and physical tests: correlation
studies are needed to (1) lessen the load of samples on the panel by
replacing a part of the tests with laboratory analyses; (2) develop
background knowledge of the chemical and physical causes of each
sensory attribute
Descriptive tests, Table 15.5;
attribute difference tests,
Table 15.3
(continued)
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 15
408
