B
Cookie Variation Exercise
1. Scope
This exercise teaches the Spectrum lexicon (list of terms) for baked cookies by exposing the
trainees to a set of samples of increasing complexity, adding one ingredient at a time.
Many products that are combinations of ingredients can be handled in this manner, by
constructing the ﬂavor complex one or two terms at a time.
2. Test Design
Trainees begin by evaluating cookie 1, baked from ﬂour and water. They are asked to
suggest terms to describe this sample. Together, the panel leader and the trainees discuss
the terms, for example cooked wheat/pasta-like/cream of wheat/breadcrumb, and
doughy/raw/raw wheat/raw ﬂour. They then select a single descriptor to represent
each set of linked terms, for example cooked wheat and raw wheat. Trainees record the
results on the scoresheet marked “vocabulary construction.”
The panel leader hands out cookie 2, baked from ﬂour, water and butter, and trainees
suggest terms for the added aromatics. Again, the group selects a single descriptor to
cover each sequence of linked (overlapping) terms.
Once the lexicon is developed, it can be validated by comparing any two of the
reference samples and determining whether the lexicon works to discriminate and
describe the samples appropriately.
The scoresheet marked “possible full vocabulary” can then be used to describe any
pair of the samples, using a scale of 0 Z absent, 5 Z weak, 10 Z medium, and 15 Z very
strong for the intensity of each attribute.
3. Reference Set
1. Flour, water
2. Flour, water, butter
3. Flour, water, margarine
4. Flour, water, shortening
5. Flour, water, shortening, salt
6. Flour, water, shortening, baking soda
7. Flour, water, sugar
8. Flour, water, brown sugar
9. Flour, water, butter, sugar
10. Flour, water, margarine, sugar
11. Flour, water, shortening, sugar
12. Flour, water, sugar, egg, margarine
13. Flour, water, sugar, egg, margarine, vanilla extract
14. Flour, water, sugar, egg, margarine, almond extract
4. Cookie Recipes
Prepare each recipe as shown in the table on the next page. Spread dough into 9 ! 13
oblong non-stick baking pan lined with parchment paper. Precut dough sheet into 32
squares before baking. Bake at 350–3758F for 35 min (or more, until slightly browned).
Ovens may vary for temperature and time.
Each cookie recipe except #8 (darker) should be the same color for serving. Remove
dried edge before serving. Adjust if needed. Store in labeled airtight containers. Samples
may be stored for 24–36 h. Recipes will serve 20–25 participants.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 11
248
