12.4.4.1
Recruitment and Screening
Consumers who meet speciﬁc recruitment requirements are most often used. Often times
these consumers are selected due to their speciﬁc behavior, product usage, or need. As an
example, a manufacturer is considering creating a new on-the-go meal that is purchased in
the grocery store and put in a lunch box for all family members to enjoy. Potential users are
of the product are adults, teens, and children. Each has speciﬁc preferences and habits. The
ideal respondent may be deﬁned by selecting a cross section of traditional and nontradi-
tional users, nonusers, dissatisﬁed users, and lead users.
12.4.4.2
Selection of Research Location
Identiﬁcation of a location of where to conduct the research is inﬂuenced by the product
category and the information desired. It is essential to go to places where the product
category is readily available. If the objective is how to make ice cream seem homemade,
one would go to ice cream parlors, creameries, ice cream stands, restaurants, and homes.
Using a variety of locations provides a broader, more complex perspective to study. Study
of airplane food requires going to airports to study current offerings. Study of massage oils
means going for a massage.
12.4.5
Data Analysis and Mining
The analysis of fuzzy front end data involves distilling the information into insights and
possibilities or opportunities. Fuzzy front end data is primarily qualitative and open to
varying interpretations. Unlike quantitative data, the outcome is words, pictures, or
stories—not quantitative with tables and statistical analysis. It is important to remember
that fuzzy front end research is exploratory and therefore allows the researcher to
pursue several interpretations. The distillation of the data begins with putting aside
personal biases and looking within and among all the collected data and asking
questions about:
† Commonalities: For instance, in a collection of individual collages, is there an
underlying theme? Do one or two colors appear throughout the set? Do
images, shapes, or objects repeat themselves? Are there commonalities in
stories among subjects and do they use similar metaphors or words?
† Missing information: What didn’t people mention? What is avoided? What was
uncomfortable for people to discuss? How are individuals compensating?
† Sensory attributes: What attributes are mentioned or highlighted the most
often? What attributes are never discussed? What product attributes frustrate
people?
† Interesting connections: How is the data connected? What sensory attributes
are connected to key emotions? What connections are interesting? For
example, every exclusive store in the mall has dark wood and gold tones;
does that combination indicate exclusivity? What unusual relationships can
you create by putting data together?
It is often useful to use a mapping technique (such as sequence mapping—see
Section 12.8.4) to cluster collected data into manageable and thematic groups. Mapping
approaches are primarily organization techniques. These techniques become very
powerful and identify further insights when completed in a group setting. It is easier to
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
268
