Wysocki and Gilbert (1989), and Wysocki, Pierce, and Gilbert (1991). The lesson to be
learned from this is that if the job is to characterize or identify a new odor, one needs as
large a panel as possible if the results are to have any validity for the general population.
A panel of one can be very misleading.
2.3.3.2
Retronasal Odor
An important part of what is called ﬂavor-by-mouth is retronasal odor. When people chew
and swallow, a portion of the volatiles in the mouth pass via the nasopharyngeal passage
into the nose where they contact the olfactory epithelium, see Figure 2.4. For more detail,
see Mozell et al. (1969).
Retronasal perception is often responsible for one’s ability to identify an odor or a ﬂavor.
As an example, Lawless et al. (2004) showed that the so-called metallic taste of solutions of
FeSO4 disappears when both nares are blocked.
2.3.3.3
Odor Memory
First encounters with an odor is often remembered over very long times. Factors that affect
its acquisition and retention are discussed by Ko¨ster, Degel, and Piper (2002). Short-term
and long-term odor memory are highly important for an animal’s survival in the wild as
they are for a human subject’s performance on a panel, see Parr, Heatherbell, and White
(2002). A comprehensive selection of odorants useful in panel selection and training are
those of ISO Standards 5496 and 22935, Initiation and Training of Assessors in the Detec-
tion and Recognition of Odours.
A problem in odor memory is that, whereas perfectly remembering an odor, subjects
tend to forget its name or to apply to it the name of a similar odor (Jo¨nsson and Olsson
2003). Similarly, when subjects do recall a name but apply it to a different odor, they
may mentally transfer characteristics associated with the name to the new odor (see
Ko¨ster, Degel, and Piper 2002).
2.3.4
The Chemical/Trigeminal Sense
Chemical irritants such as ammonia, ginger, horseradish, onion, chili peppers, menthol,
etc. stimulate the trigeminal nerve ends (see Figure 2.5), causing perceptions of burn, heat,
cold, pungency, etc. in the mucosa of the eyes, nose, and mouth. Subjects often have
difﬁculty separating trigeminal sensations from olfactory and/or gustatory ones. Experi-
ments that seek to determine olfactory sensitivity among subjects can be confounded by
responses to trigeminal rather than olfactory sensations.
For most compounds, the trigeminal response requires a concentration of the irritant that
is orders of magnitude higher than one that stimulates the olfactory or gustatory receptors.
Trigeminal effects assume practical signiﬁcance: (1) when the olfactory or gustatory
threshold is high, e.g., for short-chain compounds such as formic acid or for persons with
partial anosmia or ageusia, and (2) when the trigeminal threshold is low, e.g., for capsaicin.
The trigeminal response to mild irritants (such as carbonation, mouthburn caused by
high concentrations of sucrose and salt in confections and snacks, the heat of peppers and
other spices) may contribute to, rather than distract from, acceptance of a product
(Carstens et al. 2002).
2.3.5
The Sense of Gustation/Taste
Like olfaction, gustation is a chemical sense (see review by Drewnowski 2001). It involves
the detection of stimuli dissolved in water, oil, or saliva by the taste buds that are primarily
located on the surface of the tongue as well as in the mucosa of the palate and areas of the
Sensory Attributes and the Way We Perceive Them
17
