8
Determining Threshold
8.1
Introduction
Sensory thresholds are ill-deﬁned in theory (Lawless and Heymann 1998; Morrison 1982).
A good determination requires hundreds of comparisons with a control and results do not
reproduce well (Brown et al. 1978; Marin, Acree, and Barnard 1988; Stevens, Cain, and
Burke 1988). Published group thresholds (Fazzalari 1978; Van Gemert and Nettenbreijer
1984; Devos et al. 1990) vary by a factor of 100 for quinine sulfate in water and by much
more in complex systems. Swets (1964) doubts even the existence of a sensory threshold. A
ﬁrst reaction is that it is futile to invest time and money in threshold studies; however,
in situations such as those described in the next paragraph, the threshold approach is still
the best available.
Thresholds in air, determined by automated ﬂow olfactometry, are used to
determine degrees of air pollution (CEN 1997) and to set legal limits for polluters.
Thresholds of added substances are used with water supplies, foods, beverages,
cosmetics, paints, solvents, etc. to determine the point at which known contaminants
begin to reduce acceptability. These are the most important uses, and testing may be
done with hundreds of panelists to map the distribution of relative sensitivity in the
population. Thresholds may also be used as a means of selecting or testing panelists,
but this should not be the principal basis for selection (see Chapter 9) unless the test
objective requires detection of the stimulus at very low levels. The threshold of added
desirable substances may be used as a research tool in the formulation of foods,
beverages, etc.
It should be kept in mind that a low detection threshold for a given compound
corresponds to a high sensitivity for the ﬂavor in question. The concepts of the odor
unit (O.U.) (Guadagni et al. 1966) or ﬂavor unit (F.U.) (Meilgaard 1975) use the
threshold as a measure of ﬂavor intensity. For example, if H2S escapes from a leaking
bottle into a room, when the level reaches the threshold of detection the odor intensity
is at 1 O.U.; at double that level of H2S, the intensity is at 2 O.U., and so on. This use of
thresholds requires caution and is not applicable at intensities above 3–6 O.U. (Chapter
2). Procedures for estimating sensory intensity at levels above threshold are discussed in
Chapter 5.
The methods used to determine olfactory thresholds can have a profound inﬂuence on
the results. Hangartner and Paduch (1988) show that odorant ﬂows below the usual
snifﬁng volume of 1–2 L/sec will give rise to thresholds severalfold too high. Doty,
Gregor, and Settle (1986) found that the use of a larger sniff bottle resulted in 10- to
20-fold lower thresholds because panelists were able to raise the snifﬁng volumes.
Training can lower thresholds as much as 1000-fold (Powers and Shinholser 1988).
129
