Unscrambler 2006; SAS 2004). The programs and the growing number of publications with
examples of PLS applied to sensory data make this technique increasingly accessible to
interested researchers.
14.2.2.4
Discriminant Analysis
Discriminant analysis is a multivariate technique that is used to classify items into pre-
existing categories (deﬁned by a discrete dependent variable). A mathematical function is
developed using the set of continuous independent variables that best discriminate among
the categories from which the items arise. For instance, descriptive attribute data might be
used to classify a ﬁnished product as being “acceptable” or “unacceptable” from a quality
control perspective or descriptive and/or instrumental measures might be used to
determine the source (e.g., country or manufacturer) of a raw ingredient.
Discriminant analysis is similar to several of the multivariate techniques that have
already been discussed. In one sense, discriminant analysis is similar to regression in that
a group of continuous independent variables is used to predict the “value” of a dependent
variable. In regression analysis, the value is the magnitude of a continuous dependent
variable that is predicted using a “regression equation.” In discriminant analysis, the
value is the category of a discrete dependent variable that is predicted using a “discriminant
function.” In another sense, discriminant analysis is similar to PCA in that the correlated
nature of the independent variables is considered in developing new axes (i.e., weighted
linear combinations of the original variables). In PCA, the axes are chosen to successively
explain the maximum amount of variability. In discriminant analysis, the axes are chosen to
maximize the differences between the centers of the discrete categories of the dependent
variable. A simple graphical depiction of discriminant analysis is presented in Figure 14.11
in which acceptable and unacceptable samples of product are displayed in a plot of two
descriptive attributes: staleness and crispiness. The discriminant function deﬁnes the new
axis, D, on which the difference between the means of the two groups is maximized.
If the dependent variable contains only two categories, then only a single discriminant
function is needed. If the dependent variable contains more than two categories, then
more than one discriminant function may be needed to accurately classify the obser-
vations. The number of possible discriminant functions is one less than the number of
Group 1
Group 2
D
9
9
6
6
3
3
Staleness
Crispness
0 0
FIGURE 14.11
A graphical depiction of discriminant analysis with
the samples plotted in two of the original attributes
(staleness and crispness) and with the “axis of
maximum discrimination,” D.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
374
