14.2.1.2
Principal Components Analysis
An initial correlation analysis might identify one or more groups of variables that are highly
correlated with each other (and not highly correlated with variables from other groups).
This suggests that variables in each group contain related information and that possibly a
smaller number of unobserved (or “latent”) variables would provide an adequate summary
of the total variability. PCA is the statistical technique used to identify the smallest number
of latent variables, called “principal components,” that explain the greatest amount of
observed variability. It is often possible to explain as much as 75–90% of the total variability
in a data set consisting of 25–30 variables with as few as 2–3 principal components.
Computer programs that extract the principal components from a set of multivariate
data are widely available so theoretical and computational details are not included in the
following discussion. Those interested in a more analytical discussion of PCA are referred
to Piggott and Sharman (1986).
PCA analyzes the correlation structure of a group of multivariate observations and
identiﬁes the axis along which the maximum variability in the data occurs. This axis is
called the ﬁrst principal component. The second principal component is the axis along which
the greatest amount of remaining variability lays subject to the constraint that the axes
must be perpendicular (at right angles) to each other (i.e., orthogonal or uncorrelated).
Each additional principal component is selected to be orthogonal to all others and such
that each successive principal component explains as much of the remaining unexplained
variability as possible. The number of principal components can never be larger than the
number of observed variables and, in practice, is often much less. The process of extracting
principal components ends either when a prespeciﬁed amount of the total variability has
been explained (this quantity is always included in the computer output of a PCA) or
when extraction of another principal component would add only trivially to the explained
variability. This situation is depicted graphically by the ﬂattening out of the scree plot
(Cattell 1966) in Figure 14.3.
FIGURE 14.2
Scatterplot matrix of multiple responses useful for identifying correlated or otherwise related pairs of variables.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
360
