† The gloss and texture of a surface also affect perception of color.
† Color vision differs among subjects; degrees of color blindness exist, e.g.,
inability to distinguish red and orange or blue and green; exceptional color
sensitivity also exists, allowing certain subjects to discern visual differences
that the panel leader cannot see.
The chief lesson to be learned from this is that attempts to mask differences in color or
appearance are often unsuccessful, and if undetected, they can cause the experimenter to
erroneously conclude that a difference in ﬂavor or texture exists.
2.3.2
The Sense of Touch
The group of perceptions generally described as the sense of touch can be divided into
somesthesis (tactile sense, skinfeel) and kinesthesis (deep pressure sense or proprioception)
with both sensing variations in physical pressure. Figure 2.2 shows the several types of
nerve endings in the skin surface, epidermis, dermis, and subcutaneous tissue. These
surface nerve ends are responsible for the somesthetic sensations called touch, pressure,
heat, cold, itching, and tickling. Deep pressure, kinesthesis, is felt through nerve ﬁbers in
muscles, tendons, and joints whose main purpose is to sense the tension and relaxation of
muscles. Figure 2.3 shows how the nerve ﬁbers are buried within a tendon. Kinesthetic
perceptions corresponding to the mechanical movement of muscles (heaviness, hardness,
stickiness, etc.) result from stress exerted by muscles of the hand, jaw, or tongue and the
Free nerve
endings
Sebaceous
gland
Hair
Meissner's
corpuscle
Tactile
disks
Smooth
muscle
End bulbs
of krause
Subcutaneous
fat
Nerve ending
around hair
Duct of
sweat gland
Dermis
Ruffini
ending
Pacinian
corpuscle
Epidermis
FIGURE 2.2
Composite diagram of the skin in cross-section. Tactile sensations are transmitted from a variety of sites, e.g., the
free nerve endings and the tactile discs in the epidermis, and the Meissner corpuscles, end bulbs of Krause,
Rufﬁni endings, and Pacinian corpuscles in the dermis. (From E. Gardner. 1968. Fundamentals of Neurology, 5th Ed.,
W.B. Saunders Company, Philadelphia.)
Sensory Attributes and the Way We Perceive Them
13
