consumer, again making them more likely to participate. Follow-ups can be conducted in
various modes—phone, email, direct mail, etc.—and can remind a consumer that a survey
has been sent to their email. These communication modes can also be used to thank a
consumer for completing the survey.
There are a number of steps to consider when designing research to be conducted via an
Internet survey. The basic steps in the process of designing and implementing an online or
Web-based survey are outlined below. The success of the research study is dependent
upon all steps involved.
1. Deﬁning the survey objectives, including
† Specifying the population of interest (e.g., women age 35C or cat owners)
† Delineating the type of data to be collected (quantitative or qualitative)
† Determining the desired precision of the results
2. Determining who will be sampled, e.g., the sample method to be used
3. Creating and testing the instrument, including
† Choosing the response mode (mail, Web, or other)
† Drafting the questions
† Pretesting and revising the survey instrument
4. Contacting respondents throughout the survey process by:
† Prenotiﬁcation that the survey is coming
† Post-delivery reminder and thank-you
† Nonresponse follow-up for those who do not return the survey
5. Data collection, data reduction, and analysis
12.8
Using Other Sensory Methods to Uncover Insights
12.8.1
Relating Affective and Descriptive Data
Product development professionals handling both the R&D and marketing aspects of a
product cycle recognize that the consumer’s response in terms of overall acceptance
and purchase intent is the bottom line in the decision to go or not go with a product or
concept (Beausire, Norback, and Maurer 1988).
Despite the recognition of the need for affective data, the product development team is
generally unsure about what the consumer means when asked about actual sensory
perceptions. When a consumer rates a product as “too dry” or “not enough chocolate
taste,” is he really responding to perceived moistness/dryness or perceived chocolate
ﬂavor? Or, is he responding to words that are associated in his mind with goodness or
badness in the product? Too many researchers are taking the consumer’s response at face
value (as the researcher uses the sensory terms) and these researchers end up “ﬁxing”
attributes that may not be broken.
One key to decoding consumer diagnostics and consumer acceptance is to measure the
perceived sensory properties of a product using a more objective sensory tool (Shepherd,
Grifﬁths, and Smith 1988). The trained descriptive or expert panel provides a thumbprint
or spectrum of product sensory properties. This sensory documentation constitutes a list
of real attribute characteristics or differences among products that can be used both to
design relevant questionnaires and to interpret the resulting consumer data after the test is
completed. By relating consumer data with panel data—and, when possible, with ingre-
dient and processing variables—or with instrumental or chemical analyses, the researcher
can discover the relationships between product attributes and the ultimate bottom line:
consumer acceptance.
Affective Tests: Using Other Sensory Methods to Uncover Insights
283
