difference while other researchers involved in the same study want to demonstrate simi-
larity. All of these situations can be handled in a uniﬁed approach through the selection of
appropriate values for the test-sensitivity parameters, a, b, and pd. What values are appro-
priate depend on the speciﬁc objectives of the test.
A spreadsheet application has been developed in Microsoft Excel to aid researchers in
selecting values for a, b, and pd that provide the best compromise between the desired test
sensitivity and available resources (see Section 13.3.5). The “Test Sensitivity Analyzer”
allows researchers to quickly run a variety of scenarios with different combinations of the
number of assessors, n, the number of correct responses, x, and the maximum allowable
proportion of distinguishers, pd, and in each case observe the resulting impacts on a-risk
and b-risk.
The uniﬁed approach also applies to paired-comparison tests, such as the 2-AFC (see
Section 7.2).
In the basic triangle test for difference, the objective is merely to discover whether
a perceptible difference exists between two samples. The statistical analysis is made
under the tacit assumption that only the a-risk matters (the probability of concluding
that a perceptible difference exists when one does not). The number of assessors is
determined by looking at the a-risk table and taking into account material concerns,
such as availability of assessors, available quantity of test samples, etc. The b-risk
(the probability of concluding that no perceptible difference exists when one does)
and the proportion of distinguishers, pd, on the panel are ignored or, more appro-
priately, are assumed to be unimportant. As a result, in testing for difference, the
researcher selects a small value for the a-risk and, accepts arbitrarily large values for
the b-risk and pd (by ignoring them) to keep the required number of assessors within
reasonable limits.
In testing for similarity, the sensory analyst wants to determine that two samples
are sufﬁciently similar to be used interchangeably. Reformulating for reduced costs
and validating alternate suppliers are just two examples of this common situation. In
designing a test for similarity, the analyst determines what constitutes a meaningful
difference by selecting a value for pd and then speciﬁes a small value for b-risk to
ensure that there is only a small chance of missing that difference if it really exists.
The a-risk is allowed to become large to keep the number of assessors within
reasonable limits.
Recently, an alternative approach to similarity testing, called equivalence testing,
has been adapted from the pharmaceutical industry (Westlake 1972) and is becoming
more widely used in sensory evaluation (Arents et al. 2002; Bi 2005; Sauerhoff et al.
2005). Equivalence testing recognizes that two products can be perceptibly different
and yet still be similar enough to each other to be used interchangeably. This result
can occur in the uniﬁed approach when more than the minimum required number of
respondents participate in the test. Equivalence testing ignores the statistically
signiﬁcant difference and focuses on ensuring that the maximum difference does not
exceed a predetermined acceptable limit (e.g., pd). Equivalence testing has a strong
theoretical basis and is an approach worth considering when the primary test
objective is to ensure that any difference that might exist does not exceed
acceptable limits.
In many cases, however, it is important to balance the risk of missing a difference that
exists (b-risk) with the risk of concluding that a difference exists when it does not (a-risk).
In this case, the analyst chooses values for all three parameters, a, b, and pd, to arrive
at the number of assessors required to deliver the desired sensitivity for the test
(see Example 6.4).
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 6
64
