target products. The target products are the locations on the preference map that are
predicted to be most well-liked by either the total respondent base or any of the demo-
graphic, attitudinal, or preference segments that are of interest to the researchers. The target
products may fall at a place on the map where no actual products currently exist. In any
event, through reverse engineering, the sensory proﬁle of the virtual target product can still
be obtained. By knowing how their current products compare to the target product and by
understanding the importance that each sensory attribute has on acceptance, researchers
can prioritize their product-improvement opportunities to maximize returns.
Identifying preference segments is an integral part of key driver analysis. Preference
segments are groups of respondents who, internally, have similar patterns of liking for the
products, but whose liking patterns differ from group to group. Identifying target
products for each preference segment gives researchers a more realistic view of the possi-
bilities that exist to satisfy the largest proportion of consumers and they will have a more
realistic view of what they are giving up by selecting one set of product options
over another.
Key drivers analysis and other approaches to preference mapping are discussed in
detail, along with a case study, in Chapter 14, Section 4.
Example 12.8: Case Study: Internet Research
As explained in Section 12.7, Internet research is a valuable tool to gather insights into
consumers’ perceptions. Research of this type is ideally used throughout the product
development cycle with added insights gained when used early in the process. Speciﬁc
techniques/approaches can be implemented to decipher consumers’ needs and prefer-
ences through an interactive process.
In the case study presented, the Consumer’s Mind Internet research tool by Future Stra-
tegies was used for data collection and analysis. One hundred and sixteen female chocolate
consumers, aged 20–65 years,wererecruited via phone and Internet. Two phasesof research
were conducted: In phase one, the consumer responded to a series of questions on chocolate
attributes such as level of sweetness or creamy smooth texture, their reasons for eating
chocolate, and their selection criteria, including brand and price. For each of the questions,
consumers were asked how important the attribute is and how satisﬁed they are with their
current product. In phase two, the respondents were provided with six chocolate samples,
TABLE 12.2
Chocolate Is Better Than.?
Percent
Answer
Yes
No
A cocktail
64
36
Exercise
63
37
Sports event
59
41
Most food
59
42
Shopping
56
47
Ice cream
56
43
Nothing
55
44
A massage
52
58
A good book
39
61
A good movie
39
61
Jewelry
35
65
Day at the beach
32
68
Sex
28
72
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
292
