a category map. Using multivariate analysis techniques, the relative position of both the
products and the attributes can be displayed in graphic form (see Chapter 14, p. 362). This
permits researchers to learn (1) how products and attributes cluster within the product/
attribute space, (2) where the opportunities may be in that space for new products, and (3)
which attributes best deﬁne which products. A detailed example of a category appraisal is
that of frankfurters by Mun˜oz, Chambers, and Hummer (1996), in which consumer data
and descriptive panel data are related statistically.
Additional testing of several of the same products with consumers can permit projection
of other vectors into the space. These other vectors may represent consumers’ overall
liking and/or consumers’ integrated terms, such as creamy, rich, fresh, or soft. The identiﬁ-
cation of consumers segments based on patterns of liking for different products is also
possible. Consumer liking within each segment is driven by speciﬁc key descriptive
features of the product category being studied.
12.1.6
Support for Advertising Claims
Product and service claims made in print, or on radio, TV, or the Internet, require valid
data to support the claims. Sensory claims of parity (“tastes as good as the leading brand”)
or superiority (“cleans windows better than the leading brand”) need to be based on
consumer research and/or panel testing using subjects, products, and test designs that
provide credible evidence of the claim. For speciﬁc information on the requirements and
design considerations for this type of test, refer to ASTM (1998); see also Chapter 9 of
Gacula (1993).
12.1.7
Uncovering Consumer Needs
Working on projects that result in the creation of new unique opportunities or improved
products that are speciﬁcally designed to meet a consumer need is a developing area for
sensory evaluation. Understanding the consumers’ articulated and unarticulated needs,
wants, wishes, and behaviors results in products designed to meet speciﬁc needs based on
better target deﬁnitions for concept and product requirements, and stronger business
cases developed based on facts and speciﬁc consumer directed information. Techniques
used to collect this information are often focused in the qualitative area using observa-
tional research, one-on-one interviews, point-of-purchase interviews, diaries, and home
visits. Application of approaches uncovers how products within the category are “really”
used and identiﬁes key sensory properties, including “must have” and “nice to
have” features.
12.2
The Subjects/Consumers in Affective Tests
12.2.1
Sampling and Demographics
Whenever a sensory test is conducted, a group of subjects is selected as a sample of some
larger population, about which the sensory analyst hopes to draw some conclusion. In the
case of discrimination tests (difference tests and descriptive tests), the sensory analyst
samples individuals with average or above-average abilities to detect differences. It is
assumed that if these individuals cannot “see” a difference, the larger human population
will be unable to see it. In the case of affective tests, however, it is not sufﬁcient to merely
select or sample from the vast human population. Consumer goods and services try to
Affective Tests: The Subjects/Consumers in Affective Tests
259
