is not used in this book because it has a negative connotation [Zmalodor] to some people,
whereas, to others, it is the same as odor.)
The amount of volatiles that escape from a product is affected by the temperature and
the compounds’ nature. The vapor pressure of a substance exponentially increases with
temperature according to the following formula:
log p ZK0:05223a=T Cb
(2.1)
where p is the vapor pressure in mmHg, T is the absolute temperature (TZt8CC273.1),
and a and b are substance constants that can be found in handbooks (Howard 1996).
Volatility is also inﬂuenced by the condition of a surface: at a given temperature, more
volatiles escape from a soft, porous, and humid surface than from a hard, smooth, and
dry one.
Many odors are only released when an enzymic reaction takes place at a freshly cut
surface (e.g., the smell of an onion). Odorous molecules must be transmitted by a gas that
can be the atmosphere, water vapor, or an industrial gas, and the intensity of the perceived
odor is determined by the proportion of such gas that comes into contact with the obser-
ver’s olfactory receptors (Laing 1983).
Sensory professionals continue to be challenged by the sorting of fragrance/aroma
sensations into identiﬁable terms (see Chapter 10 on descriptive analysis and Civille
and Lyon (1996) for a database of descriptors for many products). There is not, at this
point, any internationally standardized odor terminology. The ﬁeld is very wide; accor-
ding to Harper (1972), some 17,000 odorous compounds are known, and a good perfumer
can differentiate 150–200 odorous qualities. Many terms may be ascribed to a single
compound (thymolZherb-like, green, rubber-like), and a single term may be associated
with many compounds (lemonZa-pinene, b-pinene, a-limonene, b-ocimene, citral, citro-
nellal, linalool, a-terpineol, etc.).
2.2.3
Consistency and Texture
The third set of attributes to be considered are those perceived by sensors in the mouth
other than taste and chemical feelings. Texture is also perceived by the skin and muscles of
the body, other than those in the mouth, when evaluating personal care and home
care products.
By convention, the following are referred to:
† Viscosity (for homogeneous Newtonian liquids)
† Consistency (for non-Newtonian or heterogeneous liquids and semisolids)
† Texture (for solids or semisolids)
Viscosity refers to the rate of liquids’ ﬂow under some force such as gravity. It can be
accurately measured and varies from a low of approximately 1 cP (centipoise) for water or
beer to 1000s of cP for jelly-like products. Consistency (of ﬂuids such as purees, sauces,
juices, syrups, jellies, and cosmetics), in principle, must be measured by sensory eval-
uation (Kramer and Twigg 1973); in practice, some standardization is possible by the
aid of consistometers (Kramer and Twigg 1973; Mitchell 1984). Texture is very complex
as demonstrated by the existence of the Journal of Texture Studies. Texture can be deﬁned as
the sensory manifestation of the structure or inner makeup of products in terms of their:
† Reaction to stress, measured as mechanical properties (such as hardness/ﬁrm-
ness, adhesiveness, cohesiveness, gumminess, springiness/resilience, viscosity)
Sensory Attributes and the Way We Perceive Them
9
