roux (a cooked ﬂour-and-water base used for sauces), a fondant (sugared candy base), and
sweetened milk (for vanilla and similar spices and ﬂavorings).
Serving temperature. After the sample is distributed into each serving container, and just
before serving, the product should be checked to determine if it is at the appropriate
temperature. Most sensory laboratories develop standard preparation procedures that
determine the needed temperature in the preparation container, which is necessary to
ensure the required temperature after delivery to the tasting/smelling container. The use
of standard procedures greatly reduces the need for monitoring of each individual portion.
3.3.3.2
Order, Coding, and Number of Samples
As part of any test, the order, coding, and number of samples presented to each subject
must be monitored.
The order of presentation should be balanced so that each sample appears in a given
position an equal number of times. For example, these are the possible positions for three
products, A, B, and C, to be compared in a ranking test:
ABC—ACB—BCA—BAC—CBA—CAB
(3.1)
Such a test should be set up with a number of subjects that is a multiple of six, so as to
permit presentation of the six possible combinations an equal number of times (see
Chapter 4). The presentation also should be random, which may be achieved by
drawing sample cards from a bag or by using a compilation of random numbers (see
Table 17.1). Labels can be printed from a computer to make the sample labeling easier.
At no time should odorous tape or odorous markers be used to label sample containers.
The codes assigned to each product can be biasing: for example, subjects may subcon-
sciously choose samples marked A over those marked with other letters. Therefore, single
and double letters and digits are best avoided. In addition, letters or numbers that rep-
resent companies, area codes, and test numbers or samples should not be used. Most
sensory analysts rely on the table of three-digit random numbers for product coding.
Codes should not be very prominent, either on the product or on the scoresheet. They
can be clearly yet discreetly placed on the samples and scoresheets to reduce confusion as
to sample identiﬁcation, and to reduce potential biases at the same time.
The number of samples that can be presented in a given session is a function of both
sensory and mental fatigue in the subject. With cookies or biscuits, eight or ten may be the
upper limit; with beer, six or eight. Products with a high carryover of ﬂavor, such as
smoked or spicy meats, bitter substances, or greasy textures may allow only one or two
per test. On the other hand, visual evaluations can be done on series of 20–30 samples,
with mental fatigue as the limiting factor.
3.3.4
Product Sampling
The sensory analyst should determine how much of a product is required and should
know the history of the products to be tested. Information about prior handling of experi-
mental and control samples is important in the design of the test and interpretation of
the results. A log book should be kept in the sensory laboratory to record pertinent
sample data:
† The source of the product: when and where it was made. Sample identiﬁcation is
necessary for laboratory samples (lab notebook number) as well as production
samples (date and machine codes).
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 3
36
