3.2.3.3
Preparation Area
The preparation area is a laboratory that must permit preparation of all of the possible and
foreseeable combinations of test samples at the maximum rate at which they are required.
Each booth area and descriptive analysis area should have a separate preparation labora-
tory so as to maximize the technician’s ability to prepare, present, and clean up each study.
Typically, the preparation area includes immediate access to the following, in addition to
any specialized equipment dictated by the type of samples:
† A laboratory bench ﬂush with the hatches so that sample trays will
slide through.
† Benches, kitchen range, ovens, etc. for preparation.
† Refrigerator and freezer for storage of samples.
† Storage for glassware, dishes, glasses, trays, etc.
† Dishwashers, disposers, trash compactors, wastebaskets, sinks, etc.
† Storage for panel member treats, if used.
† Large garbage containers for quick disposal of used product, etc.
Consideration should be given to company and local recycling policies so that appro-
priate receptacles are available in the preparation area.
3.2.3.4
Ofﬁce Facilities
An ofﬁce is usually situated within view of the panel booths as someone must be present
while testing is in progress. It may be convenient to locate records, storage space, and any
computer terminals and other hardware (printers, digitizers, plotters, etc.) in the same
area so that the panel leader’s time may be effectively utilized. Equipment such as paging
phones and printers should be at a sufﬁcient distance to avoid distracting the subjects.
3.2.3.5
Entrance and Exit Areas
In large facilities, it is advisable to separate entrance and exit areas for assessors so as to
prevent unwanted exchange of information. The exit area commonly contains a desk
where assessors can study the identity of the day’s samples and where they may
receive a “treat” to encourage participation. If some of the panelists are nonemployees,
the entrance/exit area should contain sufﬁcient waiting room with comfortable seats, coat
closet or coat rack, and separate restrooms.
3.2.3.6
Storage
Space must be allocated for storage of:
† Samples prior to preparation, after preparation, and at the time of serving.
† Reference samples and controls or standards under the appropriate temperature
and humidity conditions.
† Large volumes of disposable containers and utensils.
† Clean-up materials with minimal order or fragrance.
† Paper scoresheets before and after use.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 3
30
