right end of the scale represents a large amount or a very strong level of the stimulus
(Anderson 1970; Stone and Sidel 1992). In some cases, the scale is bipolar, i.e., opposite
types of stimuli are used to anchor the endpoints.
Panelists use the line scale by placing a mark on the scale to represent the perceived
intensity of the attribute in question. The marks from line scales are converted to numbers
by manually measuring the position of each mark on each scale using a ruler, a transparent
overlay, or a digitizer that is interfaced to a computer or by direct data entry by stylus on a
computer screen. The digitizer converts the position of the mark to a number, based on a
preset program, and feeds the data to the computer for analysis.
5.6.3
Magnitude Estimation Scaling
Magnitude estimation (Moskowitz 1977; Meilgaard and Reid 1979; ISO 1994; Doty and
Laing 2003) or free number matching is a scaling technique based on Stevens’ law (see
Section 5.2.2). The ﬁrst sample a panelist receives is assigned a freely chosen number (the
number can be assigned by the experimenter, in which case it is referred to as a modulus; or
the number can be chosen by the panelist). Panelists are then asked to assign all sub-
sequent ratings of subsequent samples in proportion to the ﬁrst sample rating. If the
second sample appears three times as strong as the ﬁrst, the assigned rating should be
three times the rating assigned to the ﬁrst, or reference, stimulus. Panelists are instructed
to keep the number ratings in proportion to the ratios between sensations.
Examples:
1. With a modulus: The ﬁrst cookie that you taste has an assigned “crispness”
rating of 25. Rate all other samples for crispness in proportion to that 25. If the
crispness of any sample is half that of the ﬁrst sample, assign it a crispness value
of 12.5.
First sample 25
Sample 549 _____
Sample 306 _____
None
Sweetness
Lemony
Moistness
Roughness
Hedonic
Very
None
Strong
Dry
Very moist
Smooth
Rough
Dislike
Like
FIGURE 5.6
Typical line scales.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 5
58
