for several sensory descriptive categories: Flavor (aromatics, tastes, feeling factors), solid
and semisolid texture (Mun˜oz 1986) (hardness, adhesiveness, springiness, etc.), skinfeel
(ASTM 1997; Civille and Dus 1991) (wetness, slipperiness, oiliness, etc.), and fabric feel
(Civille and Dus 1990) (slipperiness, grittiness, fuzziness, etc.).
The continued use of intensity reference scales during practice is meant to provide
ongoing reinforcement of both attributes and intensities so that the panel begins to see
the descriptive process as a use of terms and numbers (characteristics and intensities) to
deﬁne or document any product in the category learned.
9.4.3.3
Initial Practice
The development of a precise lexicon for a given product category is often a three-step
process. In the ﬁrst step, a full array of products, prototypes, or examples of product
characteristics are presented to the panel as a frame of reference. From this frame of
reference, the panel generates an original long list of descriptors to which all panelists
are invited to contribute. In the second stage, the original list, containing many overlap-
ping terms, is rearranged and reduced into a working list in which the descriptors are
comprehensive (they describe the product category completely) and yet discrete (overlap-
ping is minimized). The third and last stage consists of choosing products, prototypes, and
external references that can serve to represent good examples of the selected terms.
After the panel has a grasp on the terminology and a general understanding of the use of
each scale, the panel trainer or leader presents a series of samples to be evaluated, one at a
time, two or more of which represent a very wide spread in qualitative (attributes) and
quantitative (intensity) differences. At this early stage of development, which lasts
15–40 h, the panel gains basic skills and conﬁdence. The disparate samples allow the
panel to see that the terms and scales are effective as descriptors and discriminators and
help the members to gain conﬁdence both as individuals and as a group.
9.4.3.4
Small Product Differences
With the help of the project/product team, the panel leader collects samples that represent
smaller differences within the product class, including variations in production variables
and/or bench modiﬁcations of the product. The panel is encouraged to reﬁne the
procedures for evaluation and the terminology with deﬁnitions and references to meet
the needs of detecting and describing product differences. Care must be taken to reduce
variations between supposedly identical samples; panelists in training tend to see varia-
bility in results as a reﬂection of their own lack of skill. Sample consistency contributes to
panel conﬁdence. This stage represents 10–15 h of panel time.
9.4.3.5
Final Practice
The panel should continue to test and describe several products during the ﬁnal practice
stage of training (15–40 h). The earlier samples should be fairly different, and the ﬁnal
products tested should approach the real-world testing situations for which the panel will
be used.
During all ﬁve stages of the training program, panelists should meet after each session
and discuss results, resolve problems or controversies, and ask for additional qualitative
or quantitative references for review. This interaction is essential for developing
the common terminology, procedures for evaluation, and scaling techniques that charac-
terize a ﬁnely tuned sensory instrument.
Selection and Training of Panel Members: Descriptive Testing
153
