has reached the higher level of training, it can tackle many types of samples without the
need for separate training sessions for each.
5.2
Psychophysical Theory
Psychophysics is a branch of experimental psychology devoted to studying the relation-
ships between sensory stimuli and human responses, i.e., to improving understanding of
how the human sensory system works. University psychophysicists are constantly
reﬁning the methods by which a response can be measured, and sensory analysts need
to study their techniques and cooperate in their experiments. This chapter will provide an
overview of psychophysics as applied to sensory testing. Those interested in more detail
should read the references listed at the beginning of Section 5.1; see also Lawless (1990).
A major focus of psychophysics is to discover the form of the psychophysical function,
the relationship between a stimulus, C, and the resulting sensation, R, preferably
expressed as a mathematical function, RZf(C) (see Figure 5.2).
While the stimulus is either known (an added concentration) or easy to measure (a peak
height, an Instron reading), it is the sensation that causes difﬁculty. The subject must be
asked questions and given instructions such as:
Judge this odor on a scale of 0–99,
Is this sensation 2! as strong or 3! as strong?
Which of these solutions has the strongest taste of quinine?
No one, however, can answer such questions reproducibly and precisely. A variety of
experimental techniques are being used, e.g., comparison with a second, better known
sensation such as the loudness of a tone (this is called cross-modality matching, see p. 59),
95
60
40
20
52.5
18.5
10
Clean air
Propionic acid conc. (log ppm)
Odor strength
−1
0
1
2
FIGURE 5.2
Example of a psychophysical function. Odor strength was rated 0–99 with zeroZno odor or nasal irritation
sensation. (From Kendal-Reed et al. 1998. Chemical Senses, Vol. 23, Oxford University Press, 71–82.
With permission.)
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 5
48
