3
Controls for Test Room, Products, and Panel
3.1
Introduction
Many variables must be controlled if the results of a sensory test are to measure the true
product differences under investigation. It is convenient to group these variables under
three major headings:
1. Test controls: the test room environment, the use of booths or a round table, the
lighting, the room air, the preparation area, the entry and exit areas.
2. Product controls: the equipment used, the way samples are screened, prepared,
numbered, coded, and served.
3. Panel controls: the procedure to be used by a panelist evaluating the sample
in question.
3.2
Test Controls
The physical setting must be designed to minimize the subjects’ biases, maximize their
sensitivity, and eliminate variables that do not come from the products themselves. Panel
tests are costly because of the high cost of panelists’ time. A high level of reduction of
disturbing factors is easily justiﬁed. Dropoffs in panel attendance and panel motivation are
universal problems, and management must clearly show the value it places on panel tests
by the care and effort expended on the test area. The test area should be centrally located,
easy to reach, and free of crowding and confusion, as well as comfortable, quiet, tempera-
ture controlled, and above all, free from odors and noise.
3.2.1
Development of Test-Room Design
Since the ﬁrst edition of this book (1987), test-room design has matured, as reﬂected in
publications by national and international organizations (Eggert and Zook 1986; European
Cooperation for Accreditation of Laboratories 1995; Chambers and Wolf 1996; Inter-
national Organization for Standardization 1998). A move toward requiring accreditation
of sensory services under ISO 9000 has accelerated a trend toward uniformly high stan-
dards, e.g., with separate air exhausts from each booth.
Early test rooms made allowance for six to ten subjects and consisted of a laboratory
bench or conference table on which samples were placed. The need to prevent subjects
25
