9
Selection and Training of Panel Members
9.1
Introduction
This section is partly based on ASTM Special Technical Publication 758, Guidelines for the
Selection and Training of Sensory Panel Members (1981) and on the ISO Guide for Selection and
Training of Assessors (1993). The development of a sensory panel deserves thought and
planning with respect to the inherent need for the panel, the support from the organization
and its management, the availability and interest of panel candidates, the need for
screening of training samples and references, and the availability and condition of the
panel room and booths. In the food, fragrance, and cosmetic industries, the sensory panel
is the company’s single most important tool in research and development and in quality
control. The success or failure of the panel development process depends on the strict
criteria and procedures used to select and train the panel.
The project objective of any given sensory problem or situation determines the criteria
for selection and training of the subjects. Too often in the past (ISO 1991), the sole criterion
was a low threshold for one or more of the basic tastes. Today sensory analysts use a wide
selection of tests, speciﬁcally selected to correspond to the proposed training regimen and
end use of the panel. Taste acuity is only one aspect; much more important is the ability to
discern and describe a particular sensory characteristic in a “sea” or “fog” of other
sensory impressions.
This chapter describes speciﬁc procedures for the decision to establish a panel, the
selection and training of both difference and descriptive panels, and ways to monitor
and motivate panels. This chapter does not apply to consumer testing (see Chapter 12),
which uses naı¨ve subjects representative of the population for whom the product is
intended. Although the text uses the language of a commercial organization that exists
to develop, manufacture, and sell a “product” and has its “upper management,” “middle
management” and reward structure, the system described can be easily modiﬁed to ﬁt the
needs of other types of organizations such as universities, hospitals, civil or military
service organizations, etc.
9.2
Panel Development
Before a panel can be selected and trained, the sensory analyst must establish that a need
exists in the organization and that commitment can be obtained to expend the required
time and money to develop a sensory tool. Upper management and the project group
(R&D or QA/QC) must see the need to make decisions based on sound sensory data with
141
