spread of the data might be measured by the difference between the ﬁrst and third
quartiles of the responses (i.e., the points that 25% and 75% of the values fall below,
respectively). This difference is called the interquartile range.
The sample mean, x, is sensitive to the presence of extreme values in the data.
The median is less sensitive to extreme values, so it could again be used in place of
the sample mean as the summary measure of the center of the data. Another option is
a robust estimator of central tendency called the trimmed mean. The trimmed mean is
calculated in the same way as the sample mean but after a speciﬁc proportion (e.g., 5%)
of the highest and lowest data values have been eliminated. Various computerized statisti-
cal analysis packages routinely compute a variety of measures of central tendency
and dispersion.
Many statistical analysis procedures assume that the data are normally distributed.
If the raw data used to calculate x are normally distributed, then so is x. In fact, even if
the raw data are not distributed as normal random variables, x is still approximately
normal, provided that the sample size is greater than 25 or so. The mean of the distribution
of x is the same as the mean of the distribution of the raw data, i.e., m, and if s is the
standard deviation of the raw data, then s= ﬃﬃﬃn
p the standard deviation of x. s= ﬃﬃﬃn
p is called the
standard error of the mean. Notice that as the sample size n increases, the standard error of
the mean decreases. Therefore, as the sample size becomes larger, x is increasingly likely to
take on a value close to the true value of m. The standard error (SE) of the mean is estimated
by SEZs= ﬃﬃﬃn
p , where s is the sample standard deviation calculated in Equation 13.2.
13.2.1
Summary Analysis of Data in the Form of Ratings
The overall liking responses of 30 individuals in each of four cities are presented
in Table 13.1. The frequency distributions of the responses are presented tabularly in
Table 13.2 and graphically, using simple dot-plots, in Figure 13.2. There is no strong
indication of multimodal behavior within a city. The summary statistics for these data
are presented in Table 13.3. The box-and-whisker plots (see Danzart 1986) in Figure 13.3
provide additional information about the distribution of ratings from city to city and,
possibly, some minor concern about extreme observations.
13.2.2
Estimating the Proportion of a Population That Possesses a
Particular Characteristic
The statistic used to estimate the population proportion p of a binomial distribution is ^p
(p-hat), where
^p Z Number of "successes"
Number of trials
:
(13.3)
Suppose that 150 consumers participate in a preference test between two samples, A and
B. Furthermore, suppose that 86 of the participants say that they prefer sample A. Prefer-
ence for sample A was deﬁned as a success before the test was conducted, so from
Equation 13.3, ^pZ86=150Z0:573. That is, 0.573% or 57.3%, of consumers preferred
sample A. If a multicity test had been conducted, the estimated preferences for sample
A could be represented graphically using a bar chart such as that in Figure 13.4.
13.2.3
Conﬁdence Intervals on m and p
The previously calculated single-valued statistics, called point estimates, provide no infor-
mation as to their own precision. Conﬁdence intervals supply this missing information.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 13
316
