two-sided alternatives. For example, in a triangle test, the null hypothesis is only rejected
for large numbers of correct selections (i.e., a one-tailed test criterion). However, the
alternative hypothesis is two-sided (i.e., Ha: The samples are perceivably different).
Similar situations arise when c2 and F-tests are performed.
In practice, researchers should express their interests (i.e., the null and alternative
hypotheses) in their own words. If the researcher’s interests are clearly stated, it is easy
to decide whether the alternative hypothesis is one-sided or two-sided. If not, then further
probing is necessary. The sensory analyst should report the results of the study in terms of
the researcher’s stated interests (one-sided or two-sided), irrespective of whether the
statistical method is one-tailed or two-tailed.
13.3.3
Type-I and Type-II Errors
In testing statistical hypotheses, some conclusion is drawn. The conclusion may be correct
or incorrect. There are two ways in which an incorrect conclusion may be drawn. First, a
researcher may conclude that the null hypothesis is false when, in fact, it is true (e.g., that
a difference exists when it does not). Such an error is called a type-I error. Second, a
researcher may conclude that the null hypothesis is true, or more correctly that the null
hypothesis cannot be rejected, when, in fact, it is false (e.g., failing to detect a difference
that exists). Such an error is called a type-II error (see Figure 13.7). The practical impli-
cations of type-I and type-II errors are presented in Figure 13.8.
The probabilities of making type-I and type-II errors are speciﬁed before the investi-
gation is conducted. These probabilities are used to determine the required sample size for
the study [see, for example, Snedecor and Cochran (1980: 102)]. The probability of making
a type-I error is equal to a. The probability of making a type-II error is equal to b. Although
a and b are probabilities (i.e., numbers), it is currently a common practice to use type-I
error and a-error (as well as type-II error and b-error) interchangeably. This somewhat
casual use of terminology causes little confusion in practice.
Type I error
Type II error
Pr [type II error] = b
Pr [type I error] = a
Correct
decision
Correct
decision
Decision
Reject H0
Do not reject H0
Truth
H0 true
H0 false
FIGURE 13.7
Type-I and type-II errors of size a
and b.
Basic Statistical Methods
325
