(Section 6.6) when one of the two products has importance as a standard or reference
product, is familiar to the subjects, or is essential to the project as the current sample
against which all others are measured.
As with other overall difference tests, the “A”–“not A” test is effective in situations:
1. To determine whether product differences result from a change in ingredients,
processing, packaging, or storage.
2. To determine whether an overall difference exists, where no speciﬁc attribute(s)
can be identiﬁed as having been affected.
The test is also useful for screening of panelists, e.g., determining whether a test subject
(or group of subjects) recognizes a particular sweetener relative to other sweeteners, and it
can be used for determining sensory thresholds by a Signal Detection method.
6.7.2
Principle of the Test
Familiarize the panelists with samples “A” and “not A.” Present each panelist with
samples, some of which are product “A” while others are product “not A”; for each
sample, the subject judges whether it is “A” or “not A.” Determine the subjects’ ability
to discriminate by comparing the correct identiﬁcations with the incorrect ones using the
c2-test.
6.7.3
Test Subjects
Train 10–50 subjects to recognize the “A” and the “not A” samples. Use 20–50 presenta-
tions of each sample in the study. Each subject may receive only one sample (“A” or “not
A”), two samples (one “A” and one “not A”), or each subject may test up to ten samples in
a series. The number of samples allowed is determined by the degree of physical and/or
mental fatigue they produce in the subjects.
Note: A variant of this method, in which subjects are not familiarized with the “not A”
sample, is not recommended. This is because subjects, lacking a frame of reference, may
guess wildly and produce biased results.
6.7.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see p. 66. Present samples with scoresheet one at a
time. Code all samples with random numbers and present them in random order so that
the subjects do not detect a pattern of “A” vs. “not A” samples in any series. Do not
disclose the identity of samples until after the subject has completed the test series.
Note: In the standard version of the procedure, the following protocol is observed:
1. Products “A” and “not A” are available to subjects only until the start of the test.
2. Only one “not A” sample exists for each test.
3. Equal numbers of “A” and “not A” are presented in each test.
These protocols may be changed for any given test, but the subjects must be informed
before the test is initiated. Under no. 2, if more than one “not A” samples exist, each must
be shown to the subjects before the test.
Overall Difference Tests: “A”–“Not A” Test
89
