products, and the appearance and sound of any product. These sensory proﬁles are used in
research and development (Meilgaard and Muller 1987) and in manufacturing to:
† Deﬁne the sensory properties of a target product for new product development
(Szczesniak, Loew, and Skinner 1975).
† Deﬁne the characteristics/speciﬁcations for a control or standard for QA/QC and
R&D applications.
† Document product attributes before a consumer test to help in the selection of
attributes to be included in the consumer questionnaire and to help in an expla-
nation of the results of the consumer test.
† Track a product’s sensory changes over time with respect to understanding shelf
life, packaging, etc.
† Map perceived product attributes for the purpose of relating them to instru-
mental, chemical, or physical properties (Bargmann, Wu, and Powers 1976;
Moskowitz 1979).
† Measure short-term changes in the intensity of speciﬁc attributes over time (time–
intensity analysis).
10.3
Components of Descriptive Analysis
10.3.1
Characteristics: The Qualitative Aspect
Those perceived sensory parameters that deﬁne the product are referred to by various
terms such as attributes, characteristics, character notes, descriptive terms, descriptors, or
terminology (Johnsen et al. 1988).
These qualitative factors (that are the same as the parameters discussed under classi-
ﬁcation, Chapter 5, p. 53) include terms that deﬁne the sensory proﬁle or picture or
thumbprint of the sample. An important aspect is that panelists, unless well trained,
may have very different concepts of what a term means. The question of concept formation
is reviewed in detail by Lawless and Heymann (1998). The selection of sensory attributes
and the corresponding deﬁnition of these attributes should be related to the real chemical
and physical properties of a product that can be perceived (Civille and Lawless 1986).
Adherence to an understanding of a product’s actual rheology or chemistry make the
descriptive data easier to interpret and more useful for decision making. Statistical
methods such as ANOVA and multivariate analysis can be used to select the more discri-
minating terms (Jeltema and Southwick 1986; ISO 1994).
The components of a number of different descriptive proﬁles are given below (examples
of each are shown in parentheses). Note that this list is also the key to a more complete
list of descriptive terms given in Chapter 11, Appendix 11.1 through Appendix 11.3.
The repeat appearance of certain properties and examples is intentional.
1. Appearance characteristics
a. Color (hue, chroma, uniformity, depth)
b. Surface texture (shine, smoothness/roughness)
c. Size and shape (dimensions and geometry)
d. Interactions among pieces or particles (stickiness, agglomeration, loose
particles)
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 10
174
