Project objective: To develop a product that is high in fresh-squeezed lemon character.
Test objective: To determine which, if either, of the two ﬂavor systems tastes more like
fresh-squeezed lemonade.
Test design: As different people may have different ideas of fresh-squeezed ﬂavor, a large
panel is needed, but training is not a strong requirement. A paired comparison test with 40
subjects and an a-error of 5%, i.e., aZ0.05, is deemed suitable. The null hypothesis is H0:
Freshness AZ Freshness B. The alternative hypothesis is Ha: Freshness AsFreshness B;
either outcome is of interest, hence the test is two-sided. The samples are coded “691” and
“812,” and the scoresheet shown in Figure 7.1 is used to collect the data.
Screen samples: Taste samples in advance to conﬁrm that the intensity of lemon ﬂavors is
similar in the two samples.
Analyze results: Sample 812 is chosen by 26 subjects as having more fresh-squeezed
lemon ﬂavor. Four subjects report “no difference” and are divided between the two
samples. From Table 7.12, conclude that, with 28 out of 40 choosing 812, the number is
sufﬁcient to constitute a signiﬁcant difference.
Interpret results: Suggest that formulation 812 is used in the future, as it has signiﬁcantly
more fresh-squeezed lemon character in the opinion of this test panel.
Example 7.2: Directional Difference (One-Sided)—Beer Bitterness
Problem/situation: A brewer receives reports from the market that his beer “A” is deemed
insufﬁciently bitter, and a test brew “B” is made using a higher hop rate.
Project objective: To produce a beer that is perceptibly more bitter, but not excessively so.
Test objective: To compare beers A and B to determine whether a small but signiﬁcant
increase in bitterness has been attained.
Test design: A paired-comparison/directional difference test is chosen because the point
of interest is the increase in bitterness, nothing else. The project leader opts for a high
degree of certainty, i.e., aZ0.01. The sensory analyst codes the beers “452” and “603” and
offers them to a panel of 30 subjects of proven ability to detect small changes in bitterness.
The scoresheet asks “Which sample is more bitter?” (not “Is 603 more bitter than 452?”) so
as not to bias the subjects.
Screen samples: The samples are tasted by a small panel of six to make certain that
differences other than bitterness are minimal.
Analyze results: Sample B is selected by 22 subjects. The null hypothesis is H0: Bitterness
AZ Bitterness B, but the alternate hypothesis is Ha: Bitterness BOBitterness A, making the
test one-sided. The analyst concludes from Table 7.10 that a difference in bitterness was
perceived at a Z 0.008. The test brew was successful.
Note: The important point in deciding whether a paired-comparison test is one- or
two-sided is whether the alternative hypothesis is one- or two-sided, not whether the
question asked of the subjects has one or two replies. One-sided test situations occur
mainly where the test objective is to conﬁrm a deﬁnite “improvement” or treatment effect
(see also Chapter 13, p. 324). Some examples of one- and two-sided test situations are:
One-Sided
Two-Sided
Conﬁrm that test brew is more bitter
Decide which test brew is more bitter
Conﬁrm that test product is preferred
(as we had prior reason to expect)
Decide which product is preferred
In training tasters: which sample is
more fruity (doctored samples used)
Most other test situations—whenever
the alternative hypothesis is that the
samples are different, rather than
“one is more than the other”
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 7
108
