The most frequently used methods of measuring sensory response to a sample are, in
order of increasing complexity:
† Classiﬁcation: The items evaluated are sorted into groups which differ in a
nominal manner, e.g., marbles sorted by color.
† Grading: Time-honored methods used in commerce which depend on expert
graders who learn their craft from other graders, e.g., “USDA Choice” grade
of meat.
† Ranking: The samples (usually three to seven) are arranged in order of intensity
or degree of some speciﬁed attribute; the scale used is ordinal.
† Scaling: The subjects judge the sample by reference to a scale of numbers (often
from 0 to 10) that they have been trained to use; category scaling yields ordinal
data or sometimes interval data, line scales usually yield interval data, and
magnitude estimation, although designed to yield ratio data, in practice seems
to produce mixed interval/ratio data.
A further method, the use of odor units based on thresholds, will be discussed in
Chapter 8. In choosing among these methods and training the panel to use them, the
practicing panel leader needs to understand and then address the two major sources of
variation in panel data: (1) the differences in the perceptions of test subjects to the stimulus
and (2) the differences in the expression of those perceptions by the subjects (see Chapter 1).
Actual differences in perception are part of the considerable variability in sensory
data that sensory analysts learn to live with and psychophysicists learn to measure.
Sensory thresholds vary from one person to another (Pangborn 1981; Doty and Laing
2003). Meilgaard (1993), in a study of difference thresholds for substances added to
beer, found that panels of 20 trained tasters tend to contain two who exhibit a threshold
four times lower than the median for the panel, and two who exhibit threshold ﬁve
times higher than the median. For panels of 200C healthy but untrained individuals,
Amoore (1977), who studied solutions of pure compounds in water, found differences
of 1000-fold between the most and the least sensitive, excluding anosmics. It follows
that the verdict of a small panel of four or seven people can be highly variant with
respect to the general population, hence the tendency in this book to recommend panel
sizes of 20–30, or preferably many more. A small panel is representative only of itself or the
population it was speciﬁcally screened to represent.
The second source of variation, the way in which the subjects express a given sensory
impression, can be many times greater again, but luckily it can be minimized by thorough
training and by careful selection of the terminology and scaling techniques provided to
panelists. The literature is replete with examples of sensory verdicts that can only be
explained by assuming that many panel members were quite “at sea” during the test:
they probably did perceive the attribute under study, but they did not have a clear picture
in their mind of what aspect they were asked to measure and/or they were unfamiliar
with the mechanics of the test and/or they did understand how to express the impression.
In choosing a way of measuring responses, the sensory analyst should generally select
the simplest sensory method that will measure the expected differences between the
samples, thus minimizing panel training time. Occasionally, a more complex method
will be used that uses more terminology and more sophisticated scales, thus requiring
more training and evaluation time. For example, there may be sample differences that
were not taken into account at the planning stage and that would have been missed with
the simpler method. Overall training time may end up being less, because once the panel
Measuring Responses
47
