Authors
Morten C. Meilgaard, M.Sc., D.Sc., F.I. Brew, is visiting professor (emeritus) of Sensory
Science at the Agricultural University of Denmark, and he is senior technical advisor and
vice president of research (also emeritus) at the Stroh Brewery Co., Detroit, Michigan. He
studied biochemistry and engineering at the Technical University of Denmark where he
returned in 1982 to receive a doctorate for a dissertation on beer ﬂavor compounds and their
interactions. After 6 years as a chemist at the Carlsberg Breweries, he worked from 1957 to
1967 and again from 1989 as a worldwide consultant on brewing and sensory testing. He
served for 6 years as director of research for Cervecerı´a Cuauhte´moc in Monterrey, Mexico,
and for 25 years with Stroh. At the Agricultural University of Denmark, his task was to
establish sensory science as an academic discipline for research and teaching.
Dr. Meilgaard’s professional interests are the biochemical and physiological basis of
ﬂavor, and more speciﬁcally, the ﬂavor compounds of hops and beer and the methods
by which they can be identiﬁed, namely, chemical analysis coupled with sensory evalu-
ation techniques. He has published over 70 papers. He is the recipient of the Schwarz
Award and the Master Brewers Association Award of Merit for studies of compounds that
affect beer ﬂavor. He is the founder and past president of the Hop Research Council of the
U.S., and he is the past chairman of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee of the U.S. Brewers
Association. For 14 years, he was chairman of the Subcommittee on Sensory Analysis of
the American Society of Brewing Chemists. He has chaired the U.S. delegation to the ISO
TC34/SC12 Subcommittee on Sensory Evaluation.
Gail Vance Civille, B.S., is president of Sensory Spectrum, Inc., New Providence,
New Jersey, a management consulting ﬁrm involved in the ﬁeld of sensory evaluation
of foods, beverages, pharmaceuticals, paper, fabrics, personal care, and other consumer
products. Sensory Spectrum provides guidance in the selection, implementation, and
analysis of test methods for solving problems in quality control, research, development,
production, and marketing. She has trained several ﬂavor and texture descriptive proﬁle
panels in her work with industry, universities, and government.
As a course director for the Center for Professional Advancement and Sensory Spec-
trum, Ms. Civille has conducted several workshops and courses in basic sensory
evaluation methods as well as advanced methods and theory. In addition, she has been
invited to speak to several professional organizations on different facets of sensory
evaluation.
Ms. Civille has published several articles on general sensory methods as well as sophis-
ticated descriptive ﬂavor and texture techniques. A graduate of the College of Mount Saint
Vincent, New York, with a B.S. in chemistry, Ms. Civille began her career as a product
evaluation analyst with the General Foods Corporation.
B. Thomas Carr, M.A., is principal of Carr Consulting, Wilmette, Illinois, a research
consulting ﬁrm that provides project management, product evaluation, and statistical
support services to the food, beverage, personal care, and home care industries. He has
over 18 years of experience in applying statistical techniques to all phases of research on
consumer products. Prior to founding Carr Consulting, Mr. Carr held a variety of business
and technical positions in the food and food ingredient industries. As director of Contract
