12.6.2
Design of Quantitative Affective Tests
12.6.2.1
Quantitative Screener Development
As with screening for qualitative discussion groups, understanding the research objective
is crucial to identifying the population required for a quantitative study. Based on client
input and what is known about the product category in general, screening criteria quotas
can be established. For chocolate ﬂavored milk, the segment of the population that should
be targeted is boys (50%) and girls (50%) between the ages of 5–10 (50%) and 11–16 (50%).
Quantitative studies can require several days to complete for many reasons, such as the
total number of samples in the study versus the number that can be tested in one session.
Therefore, during the screening interview, a candidate must agree to participate and be
willing to come to the facility for more that one session to complete the study. To avoid
no-shows halfway through the study, participants are told that to receive compensation
they must complete all required sessions.
12.6.2.2
Questionnaire Design
In designing questionnaires for affective testing, the following guidelines are
recommended:
1. Keep the length of the questionnaire in proportion to the amount of time the
subject expects to be in the test situation. Subjects can be contracted to spend
hours testing several products with extensive questionnaires. At the other
extreme, a few questions may be enough information for some projects.
Design the questionnaire to ask the minimum number of questions to achieve
the project objective; then construct the test so that the respondents expect to be
available for the appropriate time span.
2. Keep the questions clear and somewhat similar in style. Use the same type of
scale—whether preference, hedonic, just about right, or intensity scale—within
the same section of the questionnaire. Intensity and hedonic questions may be
asked in the same questionnaire (see examples in Appendix 12.3), but should
be clearly distinguished. The questions and their responses should follow the
same general pattern in each section of the questionnaire. For consistency and
to insure accurate responses, the scales should be designed to go in the same
direction, e.g., [Too little//Too much], for each attribute, so that the subject
does not have to stop and decode each question.
3. Direct the questions to address the primary differences between/among the
products in the test. Attribute questions should relate to the attributes that
are detectable in the products and which differentiate among them. This can
be determined by previously conducted descriptive tests. Subjects will not
give clear answers to questions about attributes they cannot perceive or
differences they cannot detect.
4. Use only questions that are actionable. Do not ask questions to provide data
for which there is no appropriate action. If one asks subjects to rate the
attractiveness of a package and the answer comes back that the package is
somewhat unattractive, does the researcher know what to “ﬁx” or change to
alter that rating?
5. Always provide spaces on a scoresheet for open-ended questions. For
example, ask the reason a subject responded the way he/she did to a prefer-
ence or acceptance question, immediately following that question.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
272
