2. Sample preparation. The equipment and methods of sample preparation should
be described (time, temperature, any carrier used). Identify and describe raw
materials and formulations if applicable.
3. Sample presentation. The description should enable the reader to judge the
degree of bias likely to be contained in the results and may include any of the
following capable of inﬂuencing them:
† Whether panelists work individually or as a group
† Lighting used if different from normal
† Sample quantity, container, utensils, temperature
† Order of presentation (randomized, balanced)
† Coding of sample containers, e.g., three-digit random numbers
† Any special instructions such as mouth rinsing, information about the identity
of samples or variable under test; time intervals between samples; samples
being swallowed or expectorated
† Any other variable that could inﬂuence the results, e.g., time of day, high or
low humidity, age of samples, etc.
Statistical techniques. The manner in which the data reported were derived from actual
test responses should be deﬁned, e.g., conversion of scores to ranks. The type of statis-
tical analysis used and the degree to which underlying assumptions (e.g., normality)
are met should be discussed, as should the null hypothesis and alternate hypothesis, if
not trivial.
16.5
Results and Discussion
Results should be presented concisely in the form of tables and ﬁgures, and enough data
should be given to justify conclusions. However, the same information should not be
presented in both forms. Tabular data generally are more concise, except for trends and
interactions that may be easier to see from ﬁgures.
The results section should summarize the relevant collected data and the statistical
analyses. All results should be shown, including those that run counter to the
hypotheses. Reports of tests of signiﬁcance (F, c 2, t, r, etc.) should list the probability
level, the degrees of freedom if applicable, the obtained value of the test statistic, and the
direction of the effect.
In the discussion section, the theoretical and practical signiﬁcance of the results
should be pointed out and related to previous knowledge. The discussion should
begin by brieﬂy stating whether the results support or fail to support any original
hypothesis. The interpretation of data should be logically organized and should follow
the design of the experiment. The results should be interpreted, compared, and
contrasted (with limitations indicated), and the report should end with clear-
cut conclusions.
See Table 16.1 and Chapter 11, which illustrate the development of terminology and
scales for a descriptive study.
Guidelines for Reporting Results
415
