Using the Internet for research is not without its drawbacks. Internet surveys can have
low response rate compared to mailed surveys (Solomon 2001). With the growing amount
of unsolicited commercial email (also known as spam) inundating personal email accounts
in today’s Internet, consumers may be more likely to simply delete all emails that resemble
spam and not read the Web-based survey invitation. In addition, advancements in ﬁrewall
protection for personal computers have made sending these emails to potential partici-
pants very difﬁcult. There are a number of ways to increase response rates, including
simpler email and survey formats, personalized email cover letters, follow-up reminders,
and prenotiﬁcation of the intent to send a survey (Solomon 2001).
12.7.2
Applications
Internet research is a powerful tool when used correctly and can be used to conduct early
concept research, as well as for the determination of early product development direction-
ality, conjoint analysis, and both quantitative and qualitative research.
Early concept research testing may involve a description of an idea or concept that may
or may not include graphics, audio or video. Consumers are asked quantitative and open-
ended questions regarding their thoughts, feelings, and impressions of the concept.
Much research on the use of conjoint analysis and the Internet has been conducted by
Howard Moskowitz and Associates in the last ﬁve years. Conjoint analysis identiﬁes those
elements of a product concept that have the most impact on consumers. This is done by
presenting respondents with a combination of messages and determining which com-
ponents and combinations of the messages work. (Moskowitz et al. 2001).
Traditional surveys and questionnaires can be used in Internet research (such as ratings
for liking or intensity of product characteristics) to yield quantitative data.
Qualitative data can be conducted via Internet based focus groups or interviews.
Consumers are invited to join a “chat” discussing a particular product or product
concept. A highly skilled moderator who facilitates dialogue must possess additional
skills for moderating a web-based focus group, such as facilitating through typing and
the ability to control the direction of conversation as well as those participants who tend to
monopolize the conversation.
12.7.3
Internet Research Considerations
There are a number of items to consider. For example, what type of test is the sensory team
interested in running? Is the desire to conduct a consumer opinion poll or the retrieval of
information from prescreened consumers?
Internet research can be conducted by the sensory team within a company or the team
may contract an external research company. When conducting Internet research without
the aid of an external company, a number of research tools or software programs are
available for guidance, such as Zoomerang. These programs provide guidance in designing
and deploying surveys via email or website posting, and in analyzing the data. Numerous
companies exist to conduct Internet research with each having their own approach to
recruiting, data delivery and data analysis. Consider the needs of the team and the
project when selecting a company.
Communication with participating consumers is divided into four contact points:
prenotiﬁcation, contact, response, and follow-up. Although not all four areas have to be
used for each survey, using all four will deliver a higher response rate and higher customer
satisfaction. As mentioned previously, consumers who have been prenotiﬁed of an email
survey will be less likely to mistake the survey email (contact) for spam, and will be more
likely to participate. Likewise, the prenotiﬁcation contact can generate interest for the
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
282
