6. Place the overall question for preference or acceptance in the place on the
scoresheet that will elicit the most considered response. In many cases, the
overall acceptance is of primary importance, and analysts rightly tend to
place it ﬁrst on the scoresheet. However, in cases where a consumer is
asked several speciﬁc questions about appearance and/or aroma before the
actual consumption of the product, it is necessary to wait until those attributes
are evaluated and rated before addressing the total acceptance or preference
question. Appendix 12.3 provides two examples of acceptance questionnaires.
12.6.2.3
Protocol Design
Sensory tests are difﬁcult enough to control in a laboratory setting (see Chapter 3, Section
2). Outside the laboratory, in a central location or home-use setting, the need for controls
of test design, product handling, and subject/consumer selection is even greater. In
developing and designing outside affective tests, the following guidelines are
recommended:
Test facility. In a central location test, the facility and test administrators must adhere to
strict protocols regarding the size, ﬂexibility, location and environmental controls at each
test site. The test should be conducted in locations that provide high access to the target
population and subjects should be able to reach the test site easily.
Based on the design of the study, consideration should be given to the ability of each
facility to provide adequate space, privacy for each consumer/subject, proper environ-
mental controls (lighting, noise control, odor control, etc.), space for product handling and
preparation, and a sufﬁcient number of administrators and interviewers.
Test administrators. The administrators are required to be both trained and experienced
in the speciﬁc type of test design developed by the sensory analyst. In addition
to familiarity with the test design, test administrators must be given a detailed set
of instructions for the handling of questionnaires, subjects, and samples for a speciﬁc
study.
Test subjects. Each test site requires careful selection of subjects based on demographic
criteria that deﬁne the population of interest (see Section 12.2). Once selected, subjects are
made aware of the location, duration of the test, type and number of products to be tested,
and type of payment. Consumers do not respond well to surprises regarding exactly what
is expected of them.
Screen samples. Prior to any affective test, samples must be screened to determine:
† Exact sample source to be tested (bench, pilot plant, production, and code date)
† The storage conditions under which samples are to be held and shipped
† Packaging requirements for storage and shipping
† Shipping method (air, truck, refrigerated, etc.)
† Product sensory attributes using descriptive analysis for use in questionnaire
design and in ﬁnal data interpretation for the study
Sample handling. As part of the test protocol that is sent to the test site, detailed and
speciﬁc instructions regarding storage, handling, preparation, and presentation of
samples are imperative for proper test execution.
Appendix 12.4 provides worksheets for the development of a protocol for an affective
test, and an example of a completed protocol.
Affective Tests: Affective Methods: Quantitative
273
