14.2.2.3
Partial Least Squares Regression
As noted above, PCA generates factors that may not be related to the independent variable
of the regression, y. Partial least-squares (PLS) regression (see Martens and Martens 1986)
is a multivariate technique related to PCR that overcomes this weakness. Where PCA
concentrates only on explaining the variability exhibited by the correlated predictor vari-
ables (x-variables), PLS derives factors (i.e., linear combinations of the x-variables) that (1)
explain large portions of the variability in the x-variables and (2) simultaneously correlate
to as great an extent as possible with the dependent variable y. While the PLS factors may
not explain as much of the variability in the x values as would the PCA factors, PLS
ensures that each factor identiﬁed has maximal predictive power on y.
PLS has two other important advantages over PCR. First, it generates graphical output
which clearly illustrates the relationships both among the predictor variables, x values,
and between the predictor variables and y. Second, PLS readily extends to simultaneously
predicting more than one dependent variable. When a single dependent variable is
predicted, the analysis is called PLS1. When several dependent variables are predicted,
the analysis is called PLS2. The graphical relationships in PLS2 can be used to illustrate, for
example, how consumer vocabulary relates to descriptive attribute ratings (see
Figure 14.10; Mun˜oz and Chambers 1993; Popper, Heymann, and Rossi 1997).
The computations performed in a PLS regression are beyond the scope of this discus-
sion. Several computer programs that perform PLS analyses are available (Pirouette 2006;
Floral
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–0.5
0
PLS factor 1
PLS factor 2
0.5
1
–1
–1
Citrus
CITRUS
Herbal
Green
Base
FLORAL
HERBS
Woody
SPICY
Brown spice
SOAPY
Animal
Aldehyde
NATURAL
Aroma
Fruit
FRUITY
SWEET
AROMA
FIGURE 14.10
Use of graphical relationships in PLS2 to illustrate the relationship between consumer vocabulary and descriptive
attribute ratings. Terms in UPPER CASE are consumer responses. Terms in lower case are descriptive attributes.
Note that consumer and descriptive vocabularies do not agree in all cases.
Advanced Statistical Methods
373
