12.5.2
Qualitative Screener Development
The best source of information for developing the screening criteria is the client. In
addition to the broad areas or categories outlined in Section 12.2.1, a series of ques-
tions that probe usage habits, purchase criteria, allergies or sensitivities to the product,
or ingredients and concept acceptance need to be asked. Because a small number of
respondents participate in qualitative research, it is important to develop speciﬁc
attitude or usage criteria to insure respondents are representative of a diverse
group of people who meet the critical criteria. A major component of qualitative
screening addresses the consumer’s willingness to contribute in a group discussion.
The interviewer would ask the perspective participant if he/she is willing to openly
voice his/her opinion in a group. Obviously, a candidate not willing to open up and
share their feelings would not be a good choice for a qualitative discussion. A ﬁnal
selection criterion is the candidate’s ability to express thoughts and feelings in an
effective manner. An open-ended question asked at the end of the interview is typi-
cally used for this assessment. The question could be “If you could meet any one
person in history, who would it be and why?” As a safeguard for a productive
discussion and to be sure no one has sent a substitute, each chosen participant is
asked a few additional questions upon arrival at the facility. This rescreening process
should only require a few minutes to complete.
12.5.3
Types of Qualitative Affective Tests
12.5.3.1
Focus Groups
A small group of 8–12 consumers, selected on the basis of speciﬁc criteria (product usage,
consumer demographics, etc.) meet for 1–2 hours with the focus group moderator. The
moderator presents the subject of interest and facilitates the discussion using group
dynamics techniques to uncover as much speciﬁc information from as many participants
as possible directed toward the focus of the session.
Typically, two or three such sessions, all directed toward the same project focus, are held
to determine any overall trend of responses to the concept and/or prototypes. Notes are
also made of unique responses apart from the overall trend. A summary of these
responses, plus DVDs or tapes (audio or visual) are provided to the client researcher.
Purists will say that 3!12Z36 verdicts are too few to be representative of any consumer
trend; in practice, however, if a trend emerges that makes sense, modiﬁcations are made
based on this. The modiﬁcations may then be tested in subsequent groups or
quantitative research.
The literature on marketing is a rich source of details on focus groups, e.g., Krueger
(1988), Casey and Krueger (1994), and Resurreccion (1998).
12.5.3.2
Focus Panels
In this variant of the focus group, the interviewer utilizes the same group of consumers
two or three more times. The objective is to make some initial contact with the group, have
some discussion on the topic, send the group home to use the product, and then have the
group return to discuss its experiences. This approach is very effective when performing
rapid prototype development. It allows consumers to participate in the development of
a product and provide ongoing feedback and direction.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
270
