† The testing needs: how much product will be required for all of the tests to be
run, and possibly rerun, for this evaluation? All of the product representing a
sample should come from one source (same place, same line, same date, etc.). If
the product is not uniform, attempts should be made to blend and repackage the
different batches.
† The storage: where the sample has been and under what conditions. If two
products are to be compared for a processing or ingredient variable, it is not
possible to measure the treatment effect if there are differences in age, storage
temperature and humidity, shipping storage and humidity, packaging
differences, etc. that can cloud the measurement.
3.4
Panelist Controls
The way in which a panelist interacts with the environment, the product, and the test
procedure are all potential sources of variation in the test design. Control or regulation of
these interactions is essential to minimizing the extraneous variables that may potentially
bias the results.
3.4.1
Panel Training or Orientation
Panelists, of course, need careful instruction with respect to the handling of samples, the
use of the scoresheet, and the information sought in the test. The training of panelists is
discussed in detail in Chapter 9. At a minimum, panelists must be prepared to participate
in a laboratory sensory test with no instruction from the sensory analysts after the test has
started. They should be thoroughly familiar with
† The test procedures, such as the amount of sample to be tasted at one time,
delivery system (spoon, cup, sip, slurp), the length of time of contact with the
product (sip/spit, short sniff, one bite/chew), and the disposition of the product
(swallow, expectorate, leave in contact with skin or remove from skin) must be
predetermined and adhered to by all panelists.
† The scoresheet design, including instructions for evaluation; questions, termi-
nology, and scales for expressing judgment must be understood and familiar to
all panelists.
† The type of judgment/evaluation required (difference, description, preference,
acceptance) should be understood by the panelists as part of their
test orientation.
† Kelly and Heymann (1989) found no signiﬁcant difference between ingestion
and expectoration in tests, e.g., with added salt in kidney beans; ingestion did
produce narrower conﬁdence limits.
3.4.2
Product/Time of Day
With panelists who are not highly trained, it is wise to schedule the evaluation of certain
product types at the time of day when that product is normally used or consumed. The
tasting of highly ﬂavored or alcoholic products in the early morning is not recommended.
Controls for Test Room, Products, and Panel
37
