13.3.1
Statistical Hypotheses
In most sensory studies, statistical hypotheses specify the value of some parameter in a
probability distribution, such as the mean m or the population proportion p. The null
hypothesis is determined by the objective of the investigation and serves as the baseline
condition that is assumed to exist prior to running the experiment. The value speciﬁed in
the null hypothesis is used to calculate the test statistic (and resulting p-value) in the
hypothesis test. The alternative hypothesis is developed based on the prior interest of
the investigator. For example, if a company is replacing one of the raw ingredients in its
current product with a less expensive ingredient from an alternate supplier, the sensory
analyst’s only interest going into the study would be to determine with a high level of
conﬁdence that the product made with the less expensive ingredient is not less preferred
than the company’s current product. The null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis
for this investigation are
H0 : pcurrent Z pless expensive
vs:
Ha : pcurrentOpless expensive
where pi is the proportion of the population that prefers product i. Both the null and the
alternative hypotheses must be speciﬁed before the test is conducted. If the alternative
hypothesis is formulated after reviewing the data, the results of the statistical tests are too
often biased in favor of rejecting the null hypothesis.
13.3.2
One-Sided and Two-Sided Hypotheses
There are two types of alternative hypotheses: one-sided alternatives and two-sided
alternatives. Some examples of situations leading to one-sided and two-sided alternatives
are:
One-Sided
Two-Sided
Conﬁrm that a test brew is more
bitter
Decide which test brew is more bitter
Conﬁrm that a test product is
preferred to the control
Decide which test product is
preferred
In general, whenever Ha has the
form: A is more (less) than B,
where both A and B are speciﬁed
In general, whenever Ha has the
form: A is different from B
Researchers often have trouble deciding whether the alternative hypothesis is one-sided
or two-sided. General rules that work for one person may misguide others. There are no
statistical criteria for deciding if an alternative hypothesis should be one-sided or two-
sided. The form of the alternative hypothesis is determined by the prior interest of the
researcher. If the researcher is only interested in determining if two samples are different,
then the alternative hypothesis is two-sided. If, on the other hand, the researcher wants to
test for a speciﬁc difference between two samples, i.e., one sample (speciﬁed) is more
preferred or more sweet, etc., than another sample, then the alternative hypothesis is
one-sided. Most alternatives are two-sided, unless the researcher states that a speciﬁc
type of difference is of interest before the study is conducted.
A point of confusion may arise regarding one-sided vs. two-sided alternatives because
in several common sensory testing situations, one-tailed tests statistics are used to test
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 13
324
