Example 6.15: Sequential Duo–Trio Tests—Warmed-Over Flavor in Beef Patties
Project objective: The routine QC panel at an Army food engineering station has detected
warmed-over ﬂavor (WOF) in beef patties refrigerated for ﬁve days and then reheated.
The project leader, knowing that “an army marches on its stomach,” wishes to set a
realistic maximum for the number of days beef patties can be refrigerated.
Test objective: To determine, for samples stored 1 day, 3 days, and 5 days, whether a
difference can be detected vs. a freshly grilled control.
Test design: Preliminary tests show that in duo–trio tests, 5-day patties show strong WOF
and 1-day patties none, hence a sequential test design is appropriate; a decision for these
two samples could occur with few responses.
The three sample pairs (control vs. 1-day; control vs. 3-day; control vs. 5-day) are
presented in separate duo–trio tests, in which the control and storage samples are presented
as the reference for every other subject. As each subject completes one test, the result is
added to previous responses, and the cumulative results are plotted (see later). The test
series continues until the storage sample is declared similar to or different from the control.
Analyze results: The results obtained are shown in Table 6.5. Here a is the probability of
declaring a sample different from the control, when no difference exists; b is the prob-
ability of declaring a sample similar to the control, when it is really different.
The sensory analyst and the project leader decide to set both aZ0.10 and bZ0.10. They
set p0Z0.50, the null hypothesis p-value of a duo–trio test. Further, they decide that the
maximum proportion of the population that can distinguish the fresh and stored samples
should not exceed 40%. Therefore, the value of p1 is
p1 Z ð0:40Þð1:0Þ Cð0:60Þð0:50Þ Z 0:70;
(from: p1ZPr[distinguisher]Pr[correct response given by a distinguisher] C Pr[nondistin-
guisher]Pr[correct response given by a nondistinguisher]).
Samples stored for one day
Samples stored for three days
Samples stored for five days
Samples are
different
Samples are
similar
Continue
testing
Number of trials
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of correct responses
25
20
15
10
5
0
FIGURE 6.21
Test plot of results from Example 6.15: sequential duo–trio tests, warmed-over ﬂavor in beef patties.
Overall Difference Tests: Sequential Tests
103
