and 1. Weber’s law states, e.g., that the amount of an added ﬂavor that is just detectable
depends upon the amount of that added ﬂavor that is already present. If k has been
determined, one can calculate how much extra ﬂavorant is needed.
The actual derivation of Fechner’s law,
R Z k log C ðFechner’s lawÞ;
(5.2)
is complex and depends upon a number of assumptions, some of which may not hold
(Norwich and Wong 1997). Support for Fechner’s law is provided by common category
scaling. When panelists score a number of samples that vary along one dimension (for
instance, sweetness) using a scale such as 0–9, the results plot out as a logarithmic curve
similar to that of Figure 5.3. One tangible outcome of Fechner’s theories was a logarithmic
scale of sound intensity, the Decibel scale.
5.2.2
Stevens’ Law
S.S. Stevens, working at Harvard a century after Fechner, pointed out that if Equation 5.2
were correct, a tone of 100 dB should only sound twice as loud as one of 50 dB. He then
showed, with the aid of magnitude estimation scaling (see p. 58), that subjects found the
100-dB tone to be 40 times as loud as the one of 50 dB (Stevens 1970). Stevens’ main
contention (1957)—that perceived sensation magnitude grows as a power function of
stimulus intensity—can be expressed mathematically as
R Z k Cn ðStevens0 power lawÞ;
(5.3)
where k is a constant that depends upon the units in which R and C are measured, and n is
the exponent of the power function, i.e., n is a measure of the rate of growth of perceived
intensity as a function of stimulus intensity.
Figure 5.4 shows power functions with nZ0.5, 1.0, and 1.5, and Table 5.1 lists typical
exponents for a variety of sensory attributes. The ﬁnding that the exponent for visual
length is 1.0, i.e., simple proportionality, has led to the common use of line scales for
rating sensory intensity (Einstein 1976).
When n is larger than 1.0, the perceived sensation grows faster than the stimulus; an
extreme example is electric shock (Table 5.1). Conversely, when n is smaller than 1.0, as for
many odors, the sensation grows more slowly than the stimulus, and a curve results that is
superﬁcially similar to Figure 5.3.
Stevens proposed that only ratio scales are valid for the measurement of perceived
sensation, and his magnitude estimation scales are widely used in psychophysical labora-
tories. However, many authors have pointed out (Cardello and Maller 1987) that for
sensory evaluation of foods and fragrances, there are serious shortcomings. The exponents
vary with the range of stimuli in the test and with the modulus used; worse yet, the
exponents differ greatly among investigators and among individuals because of the
subjects’ idiosyncratic use of numbers.
5.2.3
The Beidler Model
The log function and the power function are merely mathematical equations that happen
to ﬁt observed sensory data. There is nothing physiological about them. McBride (1987)
has suggested that the equation below, that Beidler (1954, 1974) derived from animal
experiments and the Michaelis–Menton equation for the kinetics of enzyme–substrate
relationships in biological systems, can be used to describe human taste response.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 5
50
