For these reasons and others, it is very important for the sensory analyst to be
actively involved in the development of the scales used to measure the panelists’
responses. A good scale requires much study, must be based on a thorough under-
standing of the physical and chemical factors that govern the sensory variable in
question, and requires several reference points and thorough training of the panel. It
is unreasonable to expect that even an experienced panelist would possess the necess-
ary knowledge and skill to develop a scale that is consistently accurate and precise.
Only through the direct involvement of a knowledgeable sensory professional in the
development of scales can one obtain descriptive analyses, e.g., that will mean the same
in six months’ time as they do today.
1.3.1
The Chain of Sensory Perception
When sensory analysts study the relationship between a given physical stimulus and the
subject’s response, the outcome is often regarded as a one-step process. In fact, there are at
least three steps in the process, as shown below. The stimulus hits the sense organ and is
converted to a nerve signal that travels to the brain. With previous experiences in memory,
the brain then interprets, organizes, and integrates the incoming sensations into percep-
tions. Finally, a response is formulated based on the subject’s perceptions (Schiffman 1996).
In dealing with the fact that humans often yield varied responses to the same stimulus,
sensory professionals need to understand that differences between two people’s verdicts
can be caused either by a difference in the sensation they receive because their sense
organs differ in sensitivity or by a difference in their mental treatment of the sensation,
e.g., because of a lack of knowledge of the particular odor, taste, etc. or because of lack of
training in expressing what they sense in words and numbers. Through training and the
use of references, sensory professionals can attempt to shape the mental process so that
subjects move toward showing the same response to a given stimulus.
A commendable critical review of the psychophysical measurement of human olfactory
function (with 214 references) can be found in Chapter 10 of Doty and Laing (2003).
1.4
Conducting a Sensory Study
The best products are developed in organizations where the sensory professional is more
than the provider of a specialized testing service. Only through a process of total involve-
ment can he or she be in the position of knowing what tests are necessary and appropriate
at every point during the life of a research project. The sensory professional (like the
statistician) must take an active role in developing the research program, collaborating
with the other involved parties on the development of the experimental designs that
ultimately will be used to answer the questions posed. Erhardt (1978) divides the role
of the sensory analyst into the following seven practical tasks:
1. Determine the project objective. Deﬁning the needs of the project leader is the most
important requirement for conducting the correct test. Were the samples
submitted as a product improvement, to permit cost reduction or ingredient
substitution, or as a match of a competitor’s product? Is one sample expected
to be similar or different from others, preferred or at parity, variable in one or
more attributes? If this critical step is not carried out, the sensory analyst is
unlikely to use the appropriate test or to interpret the data correctly.
Introduction to Sensory Techniques
3
