† Take a smell walk. Pair up your panelists and ask them to take a 10-min stroll
outside and record all the smells they notice from the moment they leave the
room to the moment they return.
† Draw a sound contest. Play a sound effect and ask them to illustrate what the
sound looks like (encourage the panelists not to draw what they think created
the sound)—what would the sound look like if it had a shape/form and color.
Then ask what it would smell like, taste like, and/or feel like.
† Blindfold test. Blindfold your panelists and present them with sensory stimuli
and ask them to not only guess what it is but also describe the
sensory characteristics.
† Develop a sensory experience wish list with your panelists. What sensory
stimuli do they wish they could experience. Brainstorm 100 and then choose
12 (one per month) and do them. Remember to defer judgment during the
brainstorming—you will have plenty of opportunity to apply criteria after the
list is generated. Of course some will be far fetched (wallow in fur) but that is
part of the fun.
† Ask your panelists to come with one sensory fact that they think is cool and have
them share it with the whole panel. Allow them to share facts about other crea-
tures—do not conﬁne yourself to human sensory perception. Have a coolest (or
most obscure) fact contest.
† Have a “food the scares me” tasting day. Ask each panelist to bring in a food
that they are reluctant to taste (like pig’s feet) and then taste and describe.
Then ask some questions: Which food tasted the best? Which one surprised
you?
† Aromatherapy smells experience. Choose an aromatherapy category (i.e.,
lavender) and explore various products that are using that scent. Do a
smell compare and contrast among lavender scented products. In what
way are they similar? In what way are they different?
† Institute a weekly (or monthly) “sensory reading.” Ask panelists to bring in
and read aloud some sort of sensory related written piece. This should take
no more than 5 min. We all know about Marcel Proust and his descriptions
of madeleines—encourage your panelists to bring others. Create a rec-
ommended sensory reading list.
† Optical illusion day: Pass around different optical illusions just for fun.
† Go to http://puzzlemaker.school.discovery.com/ and create a sensory cross-
word puzzle for your panel. See who can ﬁll it out the fastest.
† Collect sensory scenes from movies. Play the scene at the end of a session.
Ask you panelists to bring in other scenes. If you do not know where to
start, use the scene from French Kiss, where Kevin Kline teaches Meg Ryan
about the ﬂavor nuances in wine; he even pulls out a reference kit.
† Have a touchy-feely day. Ask each panelist to bring in something that they
like the feel of. Pass them around and describe. You can focus on one type of
feel—things that are soft, things that are sticky, etc.
† Meet your panelists at the local mall and have a sensory treasure hunt. Pair
up your panelists or have them work in teams.
† Do a sensory mad-lib with your panelists (the bookstore has Mad-Lib books).
If you cannot ﬁnd one that will ﬁt your situation, then create your own. If
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 9
166
