predictive model obtained by regression analysis is only just that. A highly accurate model
does not imply that the independent variables drive the dependent variable. The
researcher must provide the meaning behind data. It cannot be obtained from the numeri-
cal analysis procedures used to analyze the data.
Plotting data is essential to a successful regression analysis. For the same reasons noted
in the discussion of correlation analysis, researchers could easily be misled by blindly
applying computer programs to perform regression computations without ﬁrst examining
plots of the dependent variable(s) vs. the independent variable(s) (see Figure 14.1). Other
plots that are useful in determining the quality of the regression model are presented in the
following subsections.
14.2.2.1.1
Simple Linear Regression
In simple linear regression, the value of a single dependent variable, y, is predicted using
the value of a single independent variable, x, using a linear model of the form:
y Z b0 Cb1x C3
(14.2)
where b0 and b1 are parameters of the regression equation that will be estimated in the
analysis and 3 is the unexplained deviation between the observed value of y and its
predicted value, called a residual.
The original units of measure do not have to be retained in simple linear regression. If
examination of a plot of y vs. x reveals a nonlinear relationship, it is often possible to
transform either x or y, or both, to obtain a straight-line relationship. These transformed
values of y and x can then be substituted into Equation 14.2 to obtain estimates of b0 and b1
(on the transformed scales). For example, the data in Figure 14.1c might be linearized by
taking the logarithm of y.
The coefﬁcients b1 and b0 are estimated by
^b1 Z
PðxiKxÞðyiKyÞ
P ðxiKxÞ2
:
(14.3)
and
^b0 Z yKb1 x:
(14.4)
Based on the estimated regression coefﬁcients, the predicted (or expected) value of the
dependent variable, y, is
^yi Z ^b0 C ^b1xi:
(14.5)
The estimates in Equation 14.3 and Equation 14.4 are “best” in the sense that they
minimize the sum of the squared differences between the observed and predicted
values of y, i.e., they minimize the sum of the squared residuals:
SSRes Z
X
ðyiK^yiÞ2 Z
X ^32
i :
(14.6)
This is what is meant when it is said that the regression equation was ﬁt to the data using
the “method of least squares.”
A fundamental criterion used to assess the quality of the regression equation is to
determine if the ﬁtted line results in a substantial reduction in the variability of the
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
366
