raise families; above age 65, they use healthcare tend to look for value in consumables with
an eagle eye. If a product, such as a soft drink, has a broad age appeal, the subjects should
be selected by age in proportion to their representation in the user population.
Gender. Although women still buy more consumer goods and clothes, and men buy
more automobiles, alcohol, and entertainment, the differences in purchasing habits
between the genders continue to diminish. Researchers should use very current ﬁgures
on users by gender for products such as convenience foods, snacks, personal care
products, and wine.
Income. Meaningful groups for most items marketed to the general population per
household and year are:
† Under $20,000
† $20,000–$40,000
† $40,000–$70,000
† Over $80,000
Different groups may be relevant at times, e.g., $200,000, $300,000, etc., for yachts
over 50 ft.
Geographic location. Because of the regional differences in preference for many products,
e.g., across the U.S., it is often necessary to test products in more than one location, and to
avoid testing (or to use proportional testing) of products for the general population in
areas with distinct local preferences, e.g., New York, the deep South, southern California.
In addition, attention to urban, suburban, and rural representation can also inﬂuence
test results.
Nationality, region, ethnicity, religion, education, employment. These and other factors, such
as marital status, number and ages of children in family, pet ownership, size of domicile,
etc., may be important for sampling of some products or services. The product researcher,
brand manager, or sensory analyst must carefully consider all the parameters that deﬁne
the target population before choosing the demographics of the sample for a given test.
Examples of step-by-step questionnaires used by marketing researchers to screen
prospective respondents may be found in Meilgaard (1992) and Resurreccion (1998).
12.2.2
Source of Test Subjects
Consumer tests require sampling from the population that uses the product. There are
three sources from which individuals are chosen to participate in studies: employees, local
area residents who are recruited to join a database, and the general population.
12.2.2.1
Employees
The need to sample properly from the consuming population excludes, in principle, the
use of employees and residents local to the company ofﬁces, technical center, or plants.
However, because of high cost and long turnaround time of consumer tests, companies see
a real advantage in using employees or the local population for at least part of their
affective testing.
In situations where the project objective is product maintenance (see p. 257) employees
and local residents do not represent a great risk as the test group. In a project oriented
towards maintaining “sensory integrity” of a current product, employees or local resi-
dents familiar with the characteristics of the product can render evaluations that are a
good measure of the reaction of regular users. In this case, the employee or local resident
Affective Tests: The Subjects/Consumers in Affective Tests
261
