Senses, Journal of Sensory Studies, and Journal of Texture Studies; in the proceedings of the
Pangborn Symposia (triennial) and the International Sensometrics Group (biannual), both
usually published as individual papers in the journal Food Quality & Preference; and the
proceedings of the Weurman Symposia (triennial, but published in book form, e.g.,
Martens, Dalen, and Russwurm 1987; Bessie`re and Thomas 1990). Sensory papers
presented to the Institute of Food Technologists are usually published in the IFT’s
Journal of Food Science or Food Technology.
The methods that have been developed serve economic interests. Sensory testing can
establish the worth of a commodity or even its very acceptability. Sensory testing evaluates
alternative courses to select the one that optimizes value for money. The principal uses of
sensory techniques are in quality control, product development, and research. They ﬁnd
application not only in characterization and evaluation of foods and beverages, but also in
other ﬁelds such as environmental odors, personal hygiene products, diagnosis of
illnesses, testing of pure chemicals, etc. The primary function of sensory testing is to
conduct valid and reliable tests that provide data on which sound decisions can be made.
1.3
Human Subjects as Instruments
Dependable sensory analysis is based on the skill of the sensory analyst in optimizing the
four factors, which we all recognize because they are the ones that govern any measure-
ment (Pfenninger 1979).
1. Deﬁnition of the problem: what is to be measured must be precisely deﬁned;
important as this is in “hard” science, it is much more so with senses
and feelings.
2. Test design: not only must the design leave no room for subjectivity and take into
account the known sources of bias, but it also must minimize the amount of
testing required to produce the desired accuracy of results.
3. Instrumentation: the test subjects must be selected and trained to give a repro-
ducible verdict; the analyst must work with them until he/she knows their
sensitivity and bias in the given situation.
4. Interpretation of results: using statistics, the analyst chooses the correct null
hypothesis and the correct alternative hypothesis, and draws only those con-
clusions that are warranted by the results.
Tasters, as measuring instruments, are (1) quite variable over time; (2) very variable
among themselves; and (3) highly prone to bias. To account adequately for these short-
comings requires (1) that measurements be repeated, (2) that enough subjects (often 20–50)
are made available so that verdicts are representative, and (3) that the sensory analyst
respects the many rules and pitfalls that govern panel attitudes (see Chapter 4). Subjects
vary innately in sensitivity by a factor of 2–10 or more (Meilgaard and Reid 1979; Pangborn
1981) and should not be interchanged halfway through a project. Subjects must be selected
for sensitivity and must be trained and retrained (see Chapter 9) until they fully under-
stand the task at hand. The annals of sensory testing are replete with results that are
unreliable because many of the panelists did not understand the questions and/or the
terminology used in the test, did not recognize the ﬂavor or texture parameters in the
products, or did not feel comfortable with the mechanics of the test or the numerical
expressions used.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 1
2
