sensation of the resulting strain (compression, shear, rupture) within the sample being
handled, masticated, etc. The surface sensitivity of the lips, tongue, face, and hands is
much greater than that of other areas of the body, resulting in ease of detection of small
force differences, particle size differences, and thermal and chemical differences from hand
and oral manipulation of products.
2.3.3
The Olfactory Sense
2.3.3.1
General
Airborne odorants are sensed by the olfactory epithelium that is located in the roof of the
nasal cavity (see Figure 2.4). Odorant molecules are sensed by the millions of tiny, hair-like
cilia that cover the epithelium by a mechanism that is one of the unsolved mysteries of
science (see below). The anatomy of the nose is such that only a small fraction of inspired
air reaches the olfactory epithelium via the nasal turbinates or via the back of the mouth on
swallowing (Maruniak 1988). Optimal contact is obtained by moderate Inspiration
(snifﬁng) for 1–2 s (Laing 1983). At the end of 2 s, the receptors have adapted to the new
stimulus, and one must allow 5–20 s or longer for them to de-adapt before a new sniff can
produce a full-strength sensation. A complication is that the odorant(s) can ﬁll the location
where a stimulus is to be tested, therefore, reducing the subject’s ability to detect a
particular odorant or differences among similar odorants. Cases of total odor blindness,
anosmia, are rare, but speciﬁc anosmia, inability to detect speciﬁc odors is not uncommon
(Harper 1972). For this reason, potential panelists should be screened for sensory acuity
using odors similar to those to be eventually tested.
Whereas the senses of hearing and sight can accommodate and distinguish stimuli that
are 104- to 105-fold apart, the olfactory sense has trouble accommodating a 102-fold
difference between the threshold and the concentration that produces saturation of the
Pacinian
corpuscle
Ruffini
ending
Free nerve
ending
Golgi tendon
organ
Neuromuscular
spindle
Muscle fiber
FIGURE 2.3
Kinesthetic sensors in a tendon and muscle joint. (Modiﬁed from F.A. Geldard. 1972. The Human Senses,
New York: Wiley.)
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 2
14
