12.5.3.3
Mini Groups, Diads, Triads
Mini groups, diads, and triads are an alternative to focus groups of 8–12 consumers. Mini
groups are usually comprised of 4–6 respondents, triads are 3 respondents, and diads are
2 respondents with 1 interviewer. This approach is often used when there is a need to go
in-depth on a particular discussion, if the subject being discussed is sensitive, or it is
difﬁcult to ﬁnd respondents to meet the screening criteria. The format typically follows
the same format as a focus group.
12.5.3.4
One-on-One Interviews
Qualitative affective tests in which consumers are individually interviewed in a
one-on-one setting are appropriate in situations in which the researcher needs to
understand and probe a great deal from each consumer or in which the topic is
too sensitive for a focus group. These are often called in-depth interviews or IDIs.
The interviewer conducts successive interviews with anywhere from 12 to 50 consu-
mers,
using
a
similar
format
with
each,
but
probing
in
response
to
each
consumer’s answers.
One unique variant of this method is to have a person use or prepare a product at a
central interviewing site or in the consumer’s home. Notes or a video are taken regarding
the process, which is then discussed with the consumer for more information. Interviews
with consumers regarding how they use a detergent or prepare a packaged dinner have
yielded information about consumer behavior that was very different from what the
company expected or what consumers said they did.
One-on-one interviews or observations of consumers can give researchers insights into
unarticulated or underlying consumer needs, and this in turn can lead to innovative
products or services that meet such needs.
12.6
Affective Methods: Quantitative
12.6.1
Applications
Quantitative affective tests are those that determine the responses of a large group of
consumers (50 to several hundred) to a set of questions regarding preference, liking,
sensory attributes, etc. Quantitative affective methods are applied in the following
situations:
† To determine overall preference or liking for a product or products by a sample
of consumers who represent the population for whom the product is intended.
Decisions about whether to use acceptance and/or preference questions are
further discussed under each test method.
† To determine preference or liking for broad aspects of product sensory properties
(aroma, ﬂavor, appearance, and texture). Studying broad facets of product char-
acter can provide insight regarding the factors affecting overall preference
or liking.
† To measure consumer responses to speciﬁc sensory attributes of a product.
Use of intensity, hedonic, or “just right” scales can generate data that can then
be related to the hedonic ratings discussed previously and to descriptive
analysis data.
Affective Tests: Affective Methods: Quantitative
271
