products are preferred to avoid the excessive imputation of missing values that would be
required if incomplete serving designs were used. The factor scores of the products and
the factor loadings of the respondents from a two-dimensional PCA solution are plotted
on the same graph.
Constructing the map is a simple, four-step process:
1. Plot the factor scores of the products and the factor loadings of the respondents
on the same graph (see Figure 14.12a). The factor scores of the products need to
be rescaled to fall between K1 and C1 so that they cover the same range as the
factor loadings of the respondents. For each dimension, this is accomplished by
dividing the original factor scores by the largest factor score (ignoring the sign)
on the dimension.
2. Delete the respondents whose liking data are not well ﬁt to the map (see
Figure 14.12b). These respondents can be identiﬁed in one of two ways. If a
factor analysis procedure, such as PROC FACTOR in SAS (2005), was used to
ﬁt the PCA model, the output includes communality statistics for each respon-
dent. Like the R2 value from a regression analysis, communalities are the percent
of the variability in the respondent’s liking data that is being explained by the
PCA model. Delete the respondents with communalities less than a preselected
cutoff (typically, somewhere between 0.50 and 0.75). Alternatively, delete respon-
dents who fall too close to the origin (i.e., the (0, 0) point) on the map.
A respondent’s distance from the origin is the square root of the communality.
Compute the square of each respondent’s distance from the origin by summing
the squares of their factor loadings. Delete respondents whose squared distance
from the origin is less than a preselected cutoff (again, typically, somewhere
between 0.50 and 0.75).
3. Rescale the remaining respondents to fall equally far from the origin of the plot
(see Figure 14.12c). The point that represents each respondent is rescaled to fall a
unit distance from the origin of the plot. To do this, divide both factor loadings of
each respondent by the distance that respondent falls from the origin (i.e.,
DistanceZSQRTðF2
1CF2
2Þ, where F1 and F2 are the respondent’s factor loadings).
This step is not required, but is commonly used in practice.
Internal preference maps are self-segmenting. Respondents tend to form
multiple clusters on the map. A group of respondents who fall close to each
other on the map form a segment. The test products that are closest to them
are, in general, the ones they like the most. The products that fall on the opposite
side of the map are the ones they like the least. For example, in Figure 14.12c,
there is one segment in the lower right quadrant who most like products A, C, G,
and H, and most dislike products B, E, and F. There is a more dispersed segment
in the upper right quadrant who also light products A, C, and G the most, are
more accepting of products B, E, and F, and dislike product H the most.
4. Incorporate the sensory descriptive information by correlating the attribute
intensities of the products with their factor scores and plotting the resulting
correlation coefﬁcients on the map (see Figure 14.12d). This creative use of corre-
lation analysis was ﬁrst proposed by Mc Ewan (1998). Each product has a full set
of attribute intensities and two factor scores, one for factor 1 (the horizontal axis
of the map) and one for factor 2 (the vertical axis of the map). For each attribute,
use the correlation of the attribute ratings with factor 1 as the x-coordinate and
the correlation of the attribute ratings with factor 2 as the y-coordinate.
Advanced Statistical Methods
377
