6.8.3
Test Subjects
Generally 20–50 presentations of each of the samples and the blind control with the labeled
control are required to determine a degree of difference. If the difference-from-control test is
chosen because of a complex comparison or fatigue factor, then no more than one pair
should be given to any one subject at a time. Subjects may be trained or untrained, but
panels should not consist of a mixture of the two. All subjects should be familiar with the
test format, the meaning of the scale, and the fact that a proportion of test samples will be
blind controls.
6.8.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see p. 66. When possible, offer the samples simul-
taneously with the labeled control evaluated ﬁrst. Prepare one labeled control sample for
each subject plus additional controls to be labeled as test samples. If the test is designed to
have all subjects eventually test all samples but this cannot be done in one test session, a
record of subjects by sample must be kept to ensure that remaining samples are presented
in subsequent sessions.
The scale used may be any of those discussed in Chapter 5, pp. 56–60. For example:
Verbal Category Scale
Numerical Category Scale
No difference
0ZNo difference
Very slight difference
1
Slight/moderate difference
2
Moderate difference
3
Moderate/large difference
4
Large difference
5
Very large difference
6
7
8
9ZVery large difference
(When calculating results with the verbal category scale, convert each verdict to the
number placed opposite, e.g., large differenceZ5.)
6.8.5
Analysis and Interpretation of Results
Calculate the mean difference-from-control for each sample and for the blind controls, and
evaluate the results by analysis of variance (or paired t-test if only one sample is compared
with the control), as shown in the examples.
Example 6.12 Analgesic Cream—Increase of Viscosity
Problem/situation: The home healthcare division of a pharmaceutical company plans to
increase the viscosity of its analgesic cream base. The two proposed prototypes are instru-
mentally thicker in texture than the control. Sample F requires more force to initiate
ﬂow/movement while sample N initially ﬂows easily but has higher overall viscosity.
The product researchers wish to know how different the samples are from the control.
As this type of test is best done on the back of the hands, evaluation is limited to two
samples at a time.
Project objective: To decide whether sample F or sample N is closest overall to the
current product.
Test objective: To measure the perceived overall sensory difference between the two
prototypes and the regular analgesic cream.
Overall Difference Tests: Difference-from-Control Test
93
