that the tests are appropriate and cost-effective. Appropriate use of consumer studies
include product screening prior to larger scale market research tests, assessing the viability
of new products unbranded for ingredient substitutions or cost reductions on major
brands or gaining insights for product development. Inappropriate testing derives from
poor testing systems (protocols), questionnaires, consumer screeners or the misuse of
results based upon testing the wrong products, testing at the wrong time, or using
testing as a substitute for market research studies.
An example of a typical consumer study on carbonated beverages would require that it
be conducted in two cities with recruitment of males 18–34 having purchased a carbonated
beverage at a convenience store within the last two weeks. Potential respondents are
screened by interview over the phone or in a shopping mall. Those selected and willing
to participate are given a variety of beverages together with a scorecard requesting they
rate their preference and state their reasons, along with requesting information on past
buying habits and various demographic questions such as age, income, employment,
ethnic background, etc. Results are calculated in the form of preference scores overall
and for various subgroups.
Consumer tests become more valuable when true insights are uncovered. Insights are
the “ah ha’s” that were previously not known. Insights vary and can be identiﬁed from
both quantitative and qualitative research. For example, insights may include the way a
child opens the peanut butter jar and spreads the peanut butter on a piece of bread, or the
sensory signal of freshness that is identiﬁed when seeing the steam from a hot cup of
coffee. Insights ﬂow from new information that has not previously been heard or the way
different sets of data are merged and mined.
One exciting change in recent years in the ﬁeld of sensory consumer research involves
working at the beginning of the product development process at the fuzzy front end. The
advent of the fuzzy front end approach to creating new products has provided an oppor-
tunity to uncover and discover unarticulated consumer needs and product dynamics early
in the development process. Working at the fuzzy front end is further discussed in the
following pages. For additional references about the Fuzzy Front End, see Appendix 12.5.
Study designs need to be carefully tailored to the expected consumer group. The globa-
lization of products often requires different study designs for different audiences. There
has been a signiﬁcant increase in global research from a quantitative and qualitative
perspective. As this is written, a task group of ASTM E18 is developing guidelines for
consumer research across countries and cultures.
The most effective tests for preference or acceptance are based on carefully designed test
protocols run among carefully selected subjects with representative products. The choice
of test protocol and subject is based on the project objective. Nowhere in sensory evalu-
ation is the deﬁnition of the project objective more critical than with consumer tests that
often cost from $10,000 to $100,000 or more. In-house affective tests are also expensive;
the combined cost in salaries and overhead can run $400–$2000 for a 20-min test involving
20–40 people.
From a project perspective, the reasons for conducting consumer tests usually fall into
one of the following categories:
† Product maintenance
† Product improvement/optimization
† Development of new products
† Assessment of market potential
† Product category review
† Support for advertising claims
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
256
