recessed spotlights. Another alternative is a low-pressure sodium lamp, which emits light
at a single wavelength. Low Pressure Sodium-SOX lamps are available from Phillips
and can be purchased through any NAED distributor (National Association of Electrical
Distributors). Both the theater gels and color masking lamps remove colors, but do not
eliminate differences in color intensity. The effect is that of black and white television with
degrees of gray still detectable.
Pangborn (1967) notes that an abnormal level of illumination may itself inﬂuence
the assessor’s impressions. An alternative is to choose methods other than simul-
taneous presentation to accommodate the presence of visual differences between
samples. For example, samples may be served sequentially and scored with reference to
a common standard.
3.2.4.2
Air Circulation, Temperature, and Humidity
The sensory evaluation area should be air conditioned at 72–758F and 45–55% relative
humidity (RH). (For tactile evaluation offabrics, paper nonwovens, and skincare products,
tighter humidity control may be required, e.g., 50G2% or 65G2% RH.) Recirculated and
makeup air should pass through a bank of activated carbon canisters that are capable of
removing all detectable odor. The canisters may be placed outside the testing area in a
location that allows easy replacement, e.g., every 2 or 3 months. Frequent monitoring is
required to prevent the ﬁlters from becoming ineffective and/or becoming an odor source.
A slight positive pressure should be maintained in the booth areas so as to prevent odor
contamination from the sample preparation area or from outside. If testing of odorous
materials such as sausages or cheese is a possibility, separate air exhausts must be
provided from each booth.
FIGURE 3.7
Panel booths showing arrangements for lighting. (1) Incandescent; (2) ﬂuorescent; (3) holder for sheet ﬁlters.
(Courtesy University of California at Davis, and M.M. Gatchalian, 1981. With permission.)
Controls for Test Room, Products, and Panel
33
