randomized order; the task is to rate each sample using the speciﬁed scale. The set may be
presented once only, or several times with different coding. Accuracy is much improved if
the set can be presented two or more times.
If more than one attribute is to be rated, theoretically the sample should be presented
separately for each attribute. In practical descriptive analysis, this can become impossible
because of the number of attributes to be rated in a given sample (typically from 6 to 25). In
dispensing with the requirement to rate each attribute separately, the sensory analyst accepts that
there will be some interdependence between the attributes. For example, if in a shelf-life study,
the product can go stale microbiologically (e.g., sourness) or oxidatively (e.g., rancidity);
high ratings on one will raise the rating on the other, even if it is absent. The effect must be
counteracted by making subjects aware of it and by vigorous training that enables them to
recognize each attribute independently.
7.6.5
Analysis and Interpretation of Results
The results are analyzed by the analysis of variance, see Chapter 13, p. 341, and
the examples.
Example 7.6: Popularity of Course in Sensory Analysis. Randomized
Complete Block Design
Problem/test objective: A department offood science routinely asks the students at the end of
each semester to rate the courses they have taken on a scale of K3 to C3, where K3 is very
poor, 0 is indifferent, and C3 is excellent. Thirty students complete the scoresheet with the
results shown in Table 7.3. The objective of the evaluation is to identify courses that
require improvement.
Analyze results: The data lend themselves to analysis of variance for a randomized
(complete) block design. The students are treated as “blocks”; the courses evaluated are
the “treatments.” The F-statistic for “courses evaluated” in Table 7.4 is highly signiﬁcant
(F3,87Z12.91, p!0.0001). Therefore, the course evaluator concludes that there are
differences among the average responses for the courses. The course evaluator performs
an LSD multiple comparison procedure to determine which of the course means are
signiﬁcantly different from each other (see Table 7.4, bottom). The results of the LSD
procedure reveal that the nutrition course has a signiﬁcantly lower (poorer) average
rating than the other three. There are no other signiﬁcant differences among the mean
ratings of the other three courses. The course evaluator communicates these results to the
professor and the department for further action.
Example 7.7: Hop Character in Five Beers—Split Plot Design
Problem/situation: A brewer is producing a new brand of beer that is to have a high level of
hop character. He is brewing with ﬁve alternative lots of hops that cost $1.00, $1.20, $1.40,
$1.60, and $1.80/lb.
Project objective: To choose the lot that gives the most hop character for the money.
Test objective: To compare the resulting ﬁve beers for degree of hop character; to obtain a
measure of the reliability of the results.
Test design: The logical way is to line up the ﬁve beers in front of a large enough number
of capable tasters; this is therefore a typical multisample difference test: 20 subjects evalu-
ate the samples on a scale of 0–9 using the scoresheet in Figure 7.5. The order of
presentation is randomized, and the samples are presented on three separate occasions
with different coding.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 7
118
