Any elimination of products or attributes needs to be carried out with caution. When-
ever possible, conduct the analyses with all products and attributes, then repeat the
analysis with larger and larger groups of products and attributes eliminated. The multiple
analyses often reveal interesting insights concerning the unique products and attributes,
as well as clearer understanding about what is driving liking in the category as a whole.
A preliminary screening of the candidate products can be used to determine how well
the products ﬁll the sensory space of the category. The researcher may decide to eliminate
extreme products, or products that possess unique attributes, to obtain a more uniform
coverage of the new, more narrowly deﬁned category. Alternatively, additional products
or speciﬁcally formulated prototypes could be added to the study to ﬁll any “gaps” in the
sensory space. This screening also provides some context for the researcher when the data
is analyzed and mined for information and insights.
For the prepared meals data, the attributes potato ﬂavor, red bell pepper ﬂavor, and sweet-
ness were eliminated because of trivial variability. Corn ﬂavor was eliminated because only
sample D had a supra-threshold intensity, and preliminary correlation analyses revealed
that corn ﬂavor had no signiﬁcant impact on acceptance. The remaining 26 attributes were
submitted to a PCA.
The ﬁrst decision that must be made in the development of the perceptual map is how
many dimensions (i.e., factors) to include on the map. Three criteria are used to make this
decision. The ﬁrst is to determine when there are no more large big drops in the magnitudes
of the eigenvalues. Eigenvalues measure the amount of variability each dimension explains.
If adding another dimension to the map does not substantially increase the amount of
variability being explained, it may be time to stop. This criterion is best assessed graphically
through the use of a scree plot. When the eigenvalues in the plot begin to ﬂatten out, it is time
to quit adding dimensions (see Figure14.14). The second criterion is to stop once at least 75%
of the total variability in the data has been explained. The third criterion is to stop adding
dimensions when the individual eigenvalues fall below 1.0. All standard PCA output
includes these two pieces of information (see Table 14.3).
Examination of Figure 14.14 reveals that the eigenvalues begin to ﬂatten out at the third
dimension. Examination of Table 14.3 reveals that 75% of the variability is explained by
just two dimensions and that the individual eigenvalues fall below 1.0 at six dimensions. It
was decided to ﬁt two-, three- and four-dimensional solution and to examine the resulting
factor loadings to see which made the most sense from the sensory and product points of
TABLE 14.3
Summary of Eigenvalues and Explained Variability from the PCA
Factor
Eigenvalue
Variability
Explained (%)
Cumulative (%)
1
14.98
58
58
2
4.59
18
75
3
2.22
9
84
4
1.41
5
89
5
1.23
5
94
6
0.76
3
97
7
0.44
2
99
8
0.24
1
100
9
0.12
0
100
Seventy-ﬁve percent of the variability is explained by the ﬁrst two factors. Eigenvalues are
greater than one up to factor 5.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
382
