interaction between judges and samples is reasonable. However, during training, for
instance, the sensory analyst may doubt the validity of this assumption. Split-plot
designs are used to determine if a judge-by-sample interaction is present.
In split-plot designs, judges are treated as a second experimental treatment along with
the samples. A group of b panelists are presented with t samples (in a separately random-
ized order for each panelist) in each of at least two panels (p%2). The p panels are the
blocks or “replicates” of the experimental design. Randomly selected batches or indepen-
dent preparations of the samples are used for each panel. This is the ﬁrst layer of
randomization in a split-plot study. Then the panelists receive their speciﬁc sets of
samples (arranged in a randomized order based on their arrival times at each panel).
Due to the sequential nature of the randomization scheme, where ﬁrst one treatment
factor (samples) is randomized within replicates and then a second treatment factor
(judges) is randomized within the ﬁrst treatment factor (i.e., samples), a split-plot
design is appropriate.
13.5.6.1
Split-Plot Analysis of Ratings
A special form of ANOVA is used to analyze data from a split-plot design (see Table 13.17).
The sample effect is called the “whole-plot effect.” Judges and the judge-by-sample
interaction are called the subplot effects. Separate error terms are used to test for the signi-
ﬁcance of whole-plot and subplot effects (because of the sequential nature of the
randomization scheme described previously).
The whole-plot error term (Error(A) in Table 13.17) is calculated in the same way as a
panel-by-sample interaction term would be, if one existed. The F1-statistic in Table 13.17 is
used to test for a signiﬁcant sample effect. If the value of F1 is larger than the upper-a
critical value of the F-distribution with (tK1) and (pK1)(tK1) degrees offreedom, then it is
concluded that there are signiﬁcant differences among the average values of the samples.
The F2 and F3 statistics in Table 13.17 are used to test for the signiﬁcance of the subplot
effects, judges and the judge-by-sample interaction, respectively. The denominator of both
F2 and F3 is the subplot error term MSE(B). If F3 exceeds the upper-a critical value of the
F-distribution with (bK1)(tK1) and t(pK1)(bK1) degrees of freedom, then a signiﬁcant
judge-by-sample interaction exists. The signiﬁcance of the interaction indicates that the
judges are expressing their perceptions of the differences among the samples in different
ways. Judge-by-sample interactions result from insufﬁcient training, confusion over the
deﬁnition of an attribute, or lack of familiarity with the rating technique. When a
TABLE 13.17
ANOVA Table for Split-Plot Designs Using Ratings
Source of
Variability
Degrees of
Freedom
Sum of
Squares
Mean
Square
F
Total
pbtK1
SST
Panel
pK1
SSP
Samples
tK1
SSS
MSSZSSS/(tK1)
F1ZMSS/MSE(A)
Error(A)
dfE(A)Z(pK1)(tK1)
SSE(A)
MSE(A)Z
SSE(A)/dfE(A)
Judges
bK1
SSJ
MSJZSSJ/(bK1)
F2ZMSS/MSE(B)
Judge-
by-sample
dfjsZ(bK1)(tK1)
SSJS
MSJSZSSJS/dfJS
F3ZMSJS/MSE(B)
Error(B)
dfE(B)Zt(pK1)(bK1)
SSE(B)
MSE(B)Z
SSE(B)/dfE(B)
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 13
348
