enclosed. Any information or recommendations given to the subjects (for example, about
the origin of samples) must be reported. The tabulated results (17 correct out of 30) and the
a-risk (meets the objective of 5%) follow. In the conclusion, the results are tied to the project
objective: “A signiﬁcant difference was found between the paper- and foil-wrapped
candies. The foil does produce a perceived effect. There were 10 comments about softer
texture in the foil-wrapped samples.”
Example 6.3: Triangle Test for Similarity. Determining Panel Size Using a, b, and
pd—Blended Table Syrup
Problem/situation: A manufacturer of blended table syrup has learned that his supplier of
corn syrup is raising the price of this ingredient. The research team has identiﬁed an
alternate supplier of high-quality corn syrup whose price is more acceptable. The
sensory analyst is asked to test the equivalency of two samples of blended table syrup,
one formulated with the current supplier’s product and the other with the less expensive
corn syrup from the alternate supplier.
Project objective: Determine if the company’s blended syrup can be formulated with the
less expensive corn syrup from the alternate supplier without a perceptible change
in ﬂavor.
Test objective: To test for similarity of the blended table syrup produced with corn syrups
from the current and alternate suppliers.
Number of assessors and choice of a, b, and pd: The sensory analyst and the project director,
looking at Table 17.7, note that to obtain maximum protection against falsely concluding
Taster no.
Name:
Date:
Test code:
Type of sample:
Instruction
Taste the samples on the tray from left to right. Two
samples are identical; one is different. Select the
odd/different sample and indicate by placing an X next to
the code of the odd sample.
Samples
on tray
Indicate
odd sample
Remarks
If you wish to comment on the reasons for your choice or if
you wish to comment on the product charecteristics, you
may do so under Remarks.
Triangle test
FIGURE 6.3
Scoresheet for triangle test. Example 6.2: foil vs. paper wraps for candy bars. The subject places an X in one of the
three boxes but may write remarks on more than one line.
Overall Difference Tests: Triangle Test
69
