signiﬁcant judge-by-sample interaction exists, it is meaningless to examine the overall
sample effect (tested by F1 in Table 13.17) because the presence of an interaction indicates
that the pattern of differences among the samples depends on which judge or judges are
being considered. Tables of individual judges’ mean ratings and plots of the judge-
by-sample means should be examined to determine which judges are causing the
interaction to be signiﬁcant (see Chapter 9, p. 155).
If F3 is not signiﬁcant but F2 is, then an overall judge effect is present. A signiﬁcant judge
effect conﬁrms that the judges are using different parts of the rating scale to express their
perceptions. This is not of as great a concern as a signiﬁcant judge-by-sample interaction.
However, depending on the magnitude of the differences among the judges, it may
indicate that the panel needs to be recalibrated through the use of references.
If F3 is not signiﬁcant but F1 is, then an overall sample effect is present. To determine
which of the samples differ signiﬁcantly, use Fisher’s LSD for split-plot designs:
LSD Z ta=2;dfEðAÞ
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2MSEðAÞ=pb;
q
(13.21)
where p is the number of independently replicated panels and dfE(A) and MSE(A) are the
degrees of freedom and mean square for Error(A), respectively.
13.5.7
A Simultaneous Multiple-Comparison Procedure
Thus far we have used only Fisher’s LSD multiple comparison procedure to determine
which samples differ signiﬁcantly in a designed sensory panel study. There are, in fact,
two classes of multiple-comparison procedures. The ﬁrst class, including Fisher’s LSD,
controls the comparison-wise error rate; i.e., the type-I error (of size a) applies each time a
comparison of means or rank sums is made. Procedures that control the comparison-wise
error rate are called one-at-a-time multiple comparison procedures. The second class
controls the experiment-wise error rate; that is, the type-I error applies to all of the
comparisons among means or rank sums simultaneously. Procedures that control the
experiment-wise error rate are called simultaneous multiple comparison procedures.
Tukey’s honestly signiﬁcant difference (HSD) is a simultaneous multiple comparison
procedure. Tukey’s HSD can be applied regardless of the outcome of the overall test for
differences among the samples. The general form of Tukey’s HSD for the equal sample-
size case for ratings data is
HSD Z qa;t;dfE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
MSE=n
p
;
(13.22)
where qa;t;dfE is the upper-a critical value of the studentized range distribution with dfE
degrees of freedom (see Table 17.4) for comparing t sample means. As with the LSD, dfE
and MSE are the degrees of freedom and the mean square for error from the ANOVA,
respectively, (Error(A) in the split-plot ANOVA); n is the sample size common to all the
means being compared. For randomized (complete) block designs, nZb; for split-plot
designs, nZp. Tukey’s HSD for BIB designs has the form:
HSD Z qa;t;dfE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
MSE=pr
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
kðtK1Þ=ðkK1Þt
p
:
(13.23)
The nonparametric analog to Tukey’s HSD for rank sums is
HSDrank Z qa;t;N
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
btðt C1Þ=12
p
(13.24)
Basic Statistical Methods
349
