intensity references allows for a universal comparison across products and product
categories.
11.2.7
Myth 7: The Universal Scale Cannot Show Small Differences
The number of things measured by one scale does not decrease its sensitivity. A ruler
can measure the length of a multitude of objects. The length of the scale does not
decrease sensitivity in a range of the scale as long as there are several points of discrimi-
nation. The beneﬁt of being able to discuss differences across samples, across attributes
and across product categories makes the extra work needed to implement a scale
worth it.
11.2.8
Myth 8: Published References and Terms Are the Equivalent of a Training Manual
Panel success is a result of a skilled approach to concept development, the evaluation
process and conﬁdence building. Terms and scales alone do not teach the process. The
trainer provides understanding of the basic principles, builds on the basics to deepen
understanding, fosters concept development, and encourages growth through practice
and feedback. As in learning anything, the coach matters. In a learning situation, the
book (or manual) is not nearly as critical to the learning as the teacher or coach.
11.2.9
Myth 9: Product Users Make the Best Panelists
A trained panelist does not need to use or like the product to be able to describe the
product; liking does not equal knowing. The panelists’ discrimination and description
skills stem from their expertise (through training) and experience (through practice).
11.2.10
Myth 10: Panelists Cannot Be Trained for an Array of Products
Panelists who can evaluate the appearance, fragrance, ﬂavor, or texture of one product
category are likely to be able to evaluate the appearance, fragrance, ﬂavor, or texture of
another product category, because the skills necessary to detect and describe attributes
and intensities in one product category can readily be transferred to other categories.
11.3
Terminology
The choice of terms may be broad or narrow according to the panel’s objective—only
aroma characteristics, or all sensory modalities. However, the method requires that all
terminology is developed and described by a panel that has been exposed to the under-
lying technical principles of each modality to be described. For example, a panel
describing color must understand color intensity, hue, and chroma. A panel involved in
oral, skinfeel, and/or fabric texture needs to understand what the tactile effects of
rheology and mechanical characteristics are and how these in turn are affected by moisture
level and particle size. The chemical senses pose an even greater challenge in requiring
panelists to demonstrate a valid response to changes in ingredients and processing. Words
such as vanilla, cocoa, and distilled orange oil require separate terms and references. If the
panel hopes to attain the status of “expert panel” in a given ﬁeld, it must demonstrate that
it can use a concrete list of descriptors based on an understanding of the underlying
technical differences among the attributes of a product.
The Spectrume Descriptive Analysis Method: Terminology
191
