throat. Figure 2.6 shows the taste system in three different perspectives. Compared with
olfaction, the contact between a solution and the taste epithelium on the tongue and walls
of the mouth is more regular in that every receptor is immersed for at least some seconds.
There is no risk of the contact being too brief, but there is ample opportunity for over-
saturation. Molecules causing strong bitterness probably bind to the receptor proteins, and
some may remain for hours or days [the cells of the olfactory and gustatory epithelium are
renewed on average every six to eight days (Beidler 1960)]. The prudent taster should take
small sips and keep each sip in the mouth for only a couple of seconds, then wait
(depending on the perceived strength) for 15–60 s before tasting again. The ﬁrst and
second sips are the most sensitive, and one should train oneself to accomplish in those
ﬁrst sips all the mental comparisons and adjustments required by the task at hand. Where
this is not possible, e.g., in a lengthy questionnaire with more than eight or ten questions
and untrained subjects, the experimenter must be prepared to accept a lower level
of discrimination.
The gustatory sensors are bathed in a complex solution, the saliva (that contains water,
amino acids, proteins, sugars, organic acids, salts, etc.), and they are fed and maintained
by a second solution, the blood (that contains an even more complex mixture of the same
substances). Hence, humans can only taste differences in the concentration of many
substances, not absolute concentrations, and their sensitivity to levels (e.g., of salt) that
are lower than those in saliva is low and ill deﬁned. Typical thresholds for taste substances
are shown in Figure 2.7.
The range between the weakest tastant, sucrose, and the strongest, Strophantin (a bitter
alkaloid) is no more than 104, much smaller than the range of 1,012 shown by odorants.
The ﬁgure also shows the range of thresholds for 47 individuals, and it is seen that the
most and least sensitive individuals generally differ by a factor of 102. In the case of
phenylthiocarbamide (also phenylthiourea), a bimodal distribution is seen (Amerine,
Pangborn, and Roessler 1965, 109): the population consists of two groups, one with an
average threshold of 0.16 g/100 mL and another with an average threshold of
Masticator
nerve
Pain, Hot,
Cold, Touch
Proprio-
ception
FIGURE 2.5
Pathway of the trigeminus (V) nerve. (Modiﬁed from F.H. Netter. 1973. CIBA Collection of Medical Illustrations,
Vols. 1 and 3, Ciba-Geigy Corp., Summit, NJ.) Readers interested in greater detail are referred (From J.C.
Boudreau. 1986. Journal of Sensory Studies, 1:(3/4), 185–202.)
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 2
18
