5
Measuring Responses
5.1
Introduction
This chapter describes the various ways in which sensory responses can be measured. The
purpose is to present the principle of each method of measuring responses and to discuss
its advantages and disadvantages. For a detailed critical review of this point, see Doty and
Laing (2003).
In the simplest of worlds, if tasters were really measuring instruments, they could be set
up with a range of 0–100 and be supplied a couple of calibration points (doctored samples)
for each attribute to be rated. Unfortunately, the real world of testing is not simple, and a
much more varied approach is needed. The degree of complexity is such that the
psychology departments of major universities maintain laboratories of psychophysics
(see Doty 2003; Moskowitz 2002; Lawless and Heymann 1998; Laming 1994; Sekuler
and Blake 1990; Cardello and Maller 1987; Baird and Noma 1978; Anderson 1974; Kling
and Riggs 1971). Some of the factors to consider are outlined in this chapter.
When panelists are asked to assign numbers or labels to sensory impressions, they may
do this in at least four ways (see Figure 5.1):
† Nominal data: (Latin: nomenZname). The items examined are placed in two or
more groups that differ in name but do not obey any particular order or any
quantitative relationship, e.g., the numbers worn by football players.
† Ordinal data: (Latin: ordinalisZorder). The panelist places the items examined
into two or more groups that belong to an ordered series, e.g., slight,
moderate, strong.
† Interval data: (Latin: inter vallumZspace between ramparts). Panelists place the
items into numbered groups separated by a constant interval, e.g., three, four,
ﬁve, six.
† Ratio data. Panelists use numbers that indicate how many times the stimulus in
question is stronger (or saltier, or more irritating) than a reference stimulus
presented earlier.
Nominal data contains the least information. Ordinal data carries more information and
can be analyzed by most nonparametric statistical tests. Interval and ratio data are even
better because they can be analyzed by all nonparametric methods. and often by para-
metric methods. Ratio data is preferred by some because it is free from end-of-scale
distortions; however, in practice, interval data, which is easier to collect, appears to give
equal results (see Section 5.6.3).
45
