The advantages of home use tests are (Moskowitz 1983; Resurreccion 1998):
† The product is prepared and consumed under natural conditions of use.
† Information regarding preference between products will be based on stabilized
(repeated) use rather than ﬁrst impressions alone, as in a mall intercept test.
† Cumulative effect on the respondent from repeated use can provide information
about the potentials for repeat sale.
† Statistical sampling plans can be fully utilized.
† Because more time is available for the completion of the scoresheet, more infor-
mation can be collected regarding the consumer’s attitudes towards various
characteristics of the product, including sensory attributes, packaging, price, etc.
The disadvantages of the home use tests are:
† A home use test is time consuming, taking from 1 to 4 weeks to complete.
† It uses a much smaller set of respondents than a central location test; to reach
many residences would be unnecessarily lengthy and expensive.
† The possibility of no response is greater; unless frequently reminded, respon-
dents forget their tasks; haphazard responses may be given as the test draws to
a close.
† A maximum of three samples can be compared; any larger number will upset the
natural-use situation that was the impetus for choosing a home use test in the
ﬁrst place. Thus, multisample tests, such as optimization and category review,
do not lend themselves to home use tests.
† The tolerance of the product for mistakes in preparation is tested. The resulting
variability in preparation, along with variability from the time of use and from
other foods or products used with the test product, combine to produce a large
variability across a relatively small sample of subjects.
12.4
Affective Test Methods—Fuzzy Front End
12.4.1
Deﬁnition, Purpose, Outcome
Uncovering consumer needs often occurs in the beginning, at the fuzzy front end. Typi-
cally, the research is conducted at the very early stage of a project, when planning is being
carried out, initial market and technical feasibility is being assessed, and breakthrough
ideas are being explored. Research at the fuzzy front end is conducted before dollars are
committed to detailed technical assessment, costly concept testing is executed, and signi-
ﬁcant manpower and out-of-pocket expenses are committed. This does not imply that the
tools and techniques applied to understand the consumer early cannot be applied at all
stages of the product development process.
Methods used are unique because they gather in-depth information on who the
consumer really is, how and why products are used, what they really like, dislike, and
need. To capture this level of information, one must move beyond the standard, frequently
used quantitative and qualitative approaches.
Affective Tests: Affective Test Methods—Fuzzy Front End
265
