11
The Spectrume Descriptive Analysis Method
11.1
Designing a Descriptive Procedure
The name Spectrum covers a procedure designed by Civille and developed over the years
in collaboration with a number of companies that were looking for a way to obtain repro-
ducible and repeatable sensory descriptive analysis of their products (Mun˜oz and Civille
1992, 1998). The philosophy of Spectrum is pragmatic: it provides the tools with which to
design a descriptive procedure for a given product category. The principal tools are the
reference lists contained in Appendix 11.1 through Appendix 11.3, together with
the scaling procedures and methods of panel training described in Chapter 5 and
Chapter 9. The aim is to choose the most practical system, given the product in question,
the overall sensory program, the speciﬁc project objective(s) in developing a panel, and the
desired level of statistical treatment of the data.
For example, panelists may be selected and trained to evaluate only one product or a
variety of products. Products may be described in terms of only appearance, aroma, ﬂavor,
texture, or sound characteristics, or panelists may be trained to evaluate all of these
attributes. Spectrum is a “custom design” approach to panel development, selection,
training, and maintenance. Courses teaching the basic elements of Spectrum are available
and include a detailed manual. Examples of the application are given in Johnsen et al.
(1988).
11.2
Myths about the Spectrum Descriptive Analysis Method
Throughout the years, false rumors and murmurings concerning the Spectrum descriptive
analysis method have challenged several aspects of this highly scientiﬁc approach to
descriptive panel testing. At the June 2002 IFT meeting, Sensory Spectrum presented a
paper debunking the myths surrounding the Spectrum method.
11.2.1
Myth 1: All Descriptive Methods Are the Same
The truth is that all descriptive methods measure sensory attributes and their intensities.
The Spectrum method differs from other descriptive methods in that it yields a more
technical proﬁle. Other methods differ in the selection and training of panelists, the
scale type and product focus. For more information on the comparison of descriptive
methodology see the ASTM Manual on Descriptive Analysis Testing for Sensory Evaluation
(edited by Robert C. Hootman).
189
