observations in the data set is greater than the number of independent variables.
For instance, if the number of descriptive attributes is greater than the number of
samples, then Mallow’s Cp criterion could not be used.
Another group of variable selection procedures used in multiple regression is the
forward inclusion, backward elimination, and stepwise selection procedures. These use
similar criteria for deciding if an independent variable should be included in the model or
not. Forward inclusion starts by adding to the model the independent variable that maxi-
mizes the reduction in the unexplained variability, measured by the residual sum of
squares (SSRes). Additional terms are added based on the additional reduction in SSRes
that occurs as a result of their inclusion. Computer packages use an “F-to-enter” statistic to
determine if adding a particular term will result in a statistically signiﬁcant reduction in
the unexplained variability. The independent variable with the largest F-to-enter value
is the next term added to the model. The F-to-enter value can be set to correspond
to the analyst’s desired signiﬁcance level. For example, a value of 4.0 corresponds
roughly to aZ0.05 for data sets containing 30–50 observations. The forward inclusion
procedure continues to add terms until none of the F-to-enter values are large enough
(compared to the value set in the program).
Backward elimination starts with all of the independent variables in the model and
proceeds to eliminate terms based on how little of the variability in the dependent variable
they explain. Computer packages use an “F-to-remove” statistic to measure how unim-
portant a particular term is. The term with the smallest F-to-remove is the next one to be
excluded from the model. Once again, the analyst can select the value for F-to-remove, and
the procedure will continue to remove terms until none of the F-to-removes are too small
(4.0 is also a good initial value for F-to-remove).
Stepwise selection is the recommended variable selection procedure for building
multiple linear regression models. Stepwise selection combines forward inclusion with
backward elimination by allowing for either the addition or removal of a term at each step
of the procedure (starting after two terms have been added). Terms are initially added to
the model using the F-to-enter criteria from forward selection. Because of multicolinearity,
the importance of each term in the model changes depending on which other terms are
also in the model. A term in the model may become redundant as others are added.
Stepwise selection allows for such a term to be removed, using the F-to-remove criteria
from backward elimination. The values of F-to-enter and F-to-remove are recomputed for
each independent variable at each step of the procedure. The analysis ends when none of
the statistics satisfy the values set by the analyst.
All of the diagnostics used to assess the quality of the model in simple linear regression
should be used to determine the goodness of ﬁt of the multiple linear regression model.
These include R2 (now also including R2
adj), MSRes, conﬁdence intervals on the individual
coefﬁcients, and most importantly, plots of the residuals. The potential for missing
nonlinear relationships or outliers is higher in multiple linear regression because of the
difﬁculty of visualizing in more than three dimensions. Plots of the residuals vs. the
independent variables is the easiest way to explain problems and/or to determine if
further improvements in the model are possible.
14.2.2.2
Principal Component Regression
A weakness of multiple linear regression is the manner in which it deals with correlated
predictor variables (i.e., the x variables), a problem called multicolinearity. As noted in
the previous section, if two highly correlated predictor variables are included in the
regression model, the size and even the sign of the slope coefﬁcients can be misleading.
The problem is overcome to some degree by using one of the variable selection
Advanced Statistical Methods
371
