† The potential panelist must be able to make all of the scheduled sessions in order
to participate in the study.
† To meet our client deadlines, we will generally be unable to schedule individual
make up days. Exceptions are at the panel leader’s discretion.
† If the entire panel is canceled due to weather or illness, a make up day will
be scheduled.
Vacations and Down Time
† The panel leader needs to know about panelists’ vacation plans. This is necess-
ary to meet our clients’ project time lines and to avoid scheduling conﬂicts.
† Panel is not scheduled during the week of Thanksgiving and the week between
Christmas and New Year’s Day.
Example of Panel Guidelines for a Skinfeel Panel
Salary
† Panelists will be paid once a month, with the pay periods ending on or near the
20th of the month. When possible, checks will be given to panelists at the end of
the scheduled session. Some checks may have to be mailed.
† Pay Scale is as follows:
† During training $X per hour. (Note: Training includes an intensive series of
sessions followed by biweekly sessions for approximately 3 months).
† First year after training: $1.2X per hour.
† After second year: $1.35X per hour.
† Panelist hours are calculated to the nearest half hour with the quarter hour
being the determining factor.
† Two hours guaranteed pay based upon arrival time for panel for each sched-
uled session, unless otherwise agreed on for special studies.
† Panelists must participate in all scheduled sessions to receive payment. Emer-
gency situations will be reviewed on an individual basis based on the nature
of the circumstance.
† Punctuality is important so as not to delay or disrupt panel sessions. It is
unfair to delay the session for panelists who arrive on time.
† If panelists are more than 5 min late, payment will commence with the next
quarter hour.
† Panelists should avoid making their personal appointments during
panel sessions.
† If a panelist needs to make an early departure, the panel leader should be
informed as soon as possible. Payment will be based only on the time present
at panel and the two-hour minimum does not apply.
Bonus
† Once a year, panelists will be reviewed for a potential bonus.
† Criteria for the bonus will include performance, following proper panel
protocol, attendance, and data validity.
† Attendance includes on time arrival to scheduled panel sessions and partici-
pation in scheduled studies (80%).
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 9
168
