Here, “cross-potentiation,” or facilitation, is likely to occur. In condition B, the observer
perceives more bitterness in the test sample because the tasting of sucrose has heightened
his sensitivity to quinine. A detailed discussion of adaptation phenomena in sensory
testing is given by O’Mahony (1986).
4.2.2
Enhancement or Suppression
Enhancement or suppression involves the interaction of stimuli presented simultaneously
as mixtures.
Enhancement. The effect of the presence of one substance increasing the perceived
intensity of a second substance.
Synergy. The effect of the presence of one substance increasing the perceived
combined intensity of two substances, such that the perceived intensity of the
mixture is greater than the sum of the intensities of the components.
Suppression. The effect of the presence of one substance decreasing the perceived
intensity of a mixture of two or more substances.
Examples (see key below):
1. Total perceived intensity of mixture
Situation
Name of Effect
MIX!ACB (each alone)
Mixture suppression
MIXOACB (each alone)
Synergy
2. Components of analyzable mixture
Situation
Name of Effect
A0!A
Mixture suppression
A0OA
Enhancement
Key: MIX, perceived intensity of mixture; A, perceived intensity of unmixed component A;
A0, perceived intensity of component A in mixture.
4.3
Psychological Factors
4.3.1
Expectation Error
Information given with the sample may trigger preconceived ideas. One usually ﬁnds
what they expect to ﬁnd. In testing, such as the classic tests for threshold that consist of a
series of ascending concentrations, the subject (through autosuggestion) anticipates the
sensation and reports his response before it is applicable. A panelist who hears that an
overage product has been returned to the plant will have a tendency to detect aged ﬂavors
in the samples of the day. A beer taster’s verdict of bitterness will be biased if he knows the
hop rate employed. Expectation errors can destroy the validity of a test and must be
avoided by keeping the source of samples a secret and by not giving panelists any detailed
information in advance of the test. Samples should be coded and the order of presentation
should be random among the participants. It is sometimes argued that well-trained and
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 4
40
