It is the variation in perception that led assessors to confuse products that are “on the
average” different. When two products have very different average sensory magnitudes,
they will not be confused because there is no overlap in their perceptual distributions. For
example, in Figure 13.11a, all of the perceived magnitudes of product B are higher than
those of product A. However, when the difference between the products is small, the two
distributions overlap and it is possible for the products to be confused. In Figure 13.11b,
although on the average product B is higher than product A, in a single evaluation,
product B may be perceived to be closer to the average value of product A’s distribution
than it is to the average of its own distribution. The likelihood of this occurring is pro-
portional to the distance between the averages of the two distributions. The distance
between the two averages, called d, is the fundamental measure of sensory difference in
the Thurstonian model. d is the number of standard deviations that separate the averages
of the two distributions. If d is small, the two products are similar. If d is large, the two
products are perceptibly different. The value of d can be estimated using any forced-choice
or category-scaling method. The statistic used to estimate d is d0.
13.4.2
Decision Rules in Sensory Discrimination Tests
The decision rules that assessors use to formulate their responses in forced-choice or
category-scaling tests differ from one test method to another. For example, in a duo–trio
test, the decision rule is to pick the coded sample that is perceived to be closer to the
reference sample, whereas in a 2-AFC test, the decision rule is the pick the sample that is
“stronger.” Decision rules for several forced-choice tests are presented in Table 13.9. It is
assumed that assessors apply the decision rules correctly when evaluating products. In
other words, assessors will always give the correct answer based on what they perceive,
even though the variability of perceptions may lead them to an incorrect answer with
regard to the actual differences between the products.
An example using the triangle test will clarify this point. In the triangle test, an assessor
is given three coded samples. Suppose two of the samples are from product A and one of
the samples is from product B. The assessor’s task is to identify the “odd” sample—i.e., to
identify which one of the three samples is most different from the other two. The assessor
will always select the sample that he or she perceives to be the “odd” sample on every trial
of a triangle test.
Figure 13.12 presents the results of two possible trials of the triangle test. In the ﬁrst trial,
the assessor selects the B sample because perceptually it is farther from both of the
A
B
Sensory magnitude
A
B
Sensory magnitude
d
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 13.11
(a) Thurstonian representation of two products that are very different. (b) Thurstonian representation of two
products that are confusable because their sensory distributions overlap. The degree of overlap is proportional to
the distance between the average values of the distributions, d.
Basic Statistical Methods
335
