(Dunnett 1955; 1984) for multiple comparisons with a control was applied to the sample
means and revealed that both of the test samples were signiﬁcantly different from the
blind control. It could also be concluded that product N is signiﬁcantly (p!0.05)
more different from the control than product F based on an LSD multiple comparison
(LSDZ0.4).
Interpretation: Signiﬁcant differences were detected for both samples, and it is
concluded that the two formulas are sufﬁciently different from the control to make it
worthwhile to conduct attribute difference tests (see Chapter 15, Table 15.3, p. 410) or
descriptive tests (see Chapter 11, pp. 202–205) for viscosity/thickness, skin heat, skin
cool, and afterfeel.
Example 6.13: Flavored Peanut Snacks
Problem/situation: The quality assurance manager of a large snack processing plant needs
to monitor the sensory variation in a line ofﬂavored peanut snacks and to set speciﬁcations
for production of the snacks. The innate variations among batches of each of the
added ﬂavors (honey, spicy, barbecue, etc.) preclude the use of the triangle, duo–trio, or
same/different tests. In most overall difference tests such as these, if subjects can detect
variations within a batch, then this severely reduces the chances of a test detecting
batch-to-batch differences. What is needed is a test that allows for separation of the vari-
ation within batches from the variation between batches.
Project objective: To develop a test method suitable for monitoring batch-to-batch vari-
ations in the production of ﬂavored peanut snacks. Ultimately to set QA/QC
sensory speciﬁcations.
Test objective: To measure the perceived difference within batches and between batches of
ﬂavored peanuts of known origin.
Test design: Samples from a recent control batch (normal production) are pulled from the
warehouse. Jars from each of two lines are sampled and labeled control A and control B.
These samples represent the variation within a batch. Samples are also pulled from a lot of
production in which a different batch of peanuts served as the raw material. The sample is
marked “test.” A difference-from-control test design is set up in which three pairs are
tested:
† Control A vs. control A (the blind control)
† Control A vs. control B (the within batch measure)
† Control A vs. test (the between batch measure)
Fifty subjects are scheduled to participate in three separate tests (CA vs. CA; CA vs. CB;
CA vs. test) over a three-day period. The pairs are randomized across subjects. In all pairs,
CA is given ﬁrst as the control, and subjects rate the difference between the members of the
pair on a scale of 0–10. The results are analyzed by the procedure of Aust et al. (1985),
according to which the difference between the score for the blind control and that for the
within batch measure is subtracted from the between batch measure to determine statisti-
cal signiﬁcance for a difference.
Screen samples: The samples are prescreened for ﬂavor, texture, and appearance by
individuals from production, QA, marketing, and R&D who are familiar with the
product, to determine that each sample is representative of the within and between
batch variations for the product. Along with the sensory analyst, the group decides that
for the test, only whole peanuts will be sampled and tested.
Overall Difference Tests: Difference-from-Control Test
97
