2. Determine the test objective. Once the objective of the project can be clearly stated,
the sensory analyst and the project leader can determine the test objective:
overall difference, attribute difference, relative preference, acceptability, etc.
Avoid attempting to answer too many questions in a single test. A good idea
is for the sensory analyst and project leader to record, in writing, before the test is
initiated the project objective, the test objective, and a brief statement of how the
test results will be used.
3. Screen the samples. During the discussion of project and test objectives, the
sensory analyst should examine all of the sensory properties of the samples to
be tested. This enables the sensory analyst to use test methods that take into
account any sensory biases introduced by the samples. For example, visual cues
(color, thickness, sheen) may inﬂuence overall difference responses, such as those
provided in a triangle test, e.g., to measure differences due to sweetness of
sucrose vs. aspartame. In such a case, an attribute test would be more appro-
priate. In addition, product screening provides information on possible terms to
be included in the scoresheet.
4. Design the test. After deﬁning the project and test objectives and screening the
samples, the sensory analyst can proceed to design the test. This involves selection
of the test technique (see Chapter 6 through Chapter 8, Chapter 10 through
Chapter 12, and Chapter 15); selecting and training subjects (see Chapter 9);
designing the accompanying scoresheet (ballot, questionnaire); specifying the
criteria for sample preparation and presentation (see Chapter 3); and determining
how the data will be analyzed (see Chapter 13 and Chapter 14). Care must be
taken, in each step, to adhere to the principles of statistical design of experiments
to ensure that the most sensitive evaluation of the test objective is attained.
5. Conduct the test. Even when technicians are used to carry out the test, the sensory
analyst is responsible for ensuring that all the requirements of the test design
are met.
6. Analyze the data. Because the procedure for analysis of the data was determined at
the test design stage, the necessary expertise and statistical programs, if used, will
be ready to begin data analysis as soon as the study is completed. The data should
be analyzed for the main treatment effect (test objective) as well as other test
variables, such as order of presentation, time of day, different days, and/or
subject variables such as age, sex, geographic area, etc.
7. Interpret and report results. The initial clear statement of the project and test objec-
tives will enable the sensory analyst to review the results, express them in terms of
the stated objectives, and make any recommendations for action that may be
warranted. The latter should be stated clearly and concisely in a written report
that also summarizes the data, identiﬁes the samples, and states the number and
qualiﬁcation of subjects (see Chapter 16).
The main purpose of this book is to help the sensory analyst develop the methodology,
subject pool, facilities, and test controls required to conduct analytical sensory tests with
trained and/or experienced tasters. In addition, Chapter 12 discusses the organization of
consumer tests, i.e., the use of naı¨ve consumers (nonanalytical) for large-scale evaluation,
structured to represent the consumption and responses of a large population of the
product market.
The role of sensory evaluation is to provide valid and reliable information to R&D,
production, and marketing in order for management to make sound business decisions
about the perceived sensory properties of products. The ultimate goal of any sensory
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 1
4
