Table 15.2
Continued
Test
Areas of Application
7. Sequential tests
Used with any of the above tests 1–3, to determine with a minimum of testing,
at a predetermined signiﬁcance level, whether the two samples are
perceptibly (1) identical or (2) different
8. Similarity mode
Used with tests 1–3 or 7, when the test objective is to prove that no perceptible
difference exists between two products; used in situations such as: (1) the
substitution of a new ingredient for an old one that has become too
expensive or unavailable or (2) a change in processing brought about by
replacement of an old or inefﬁcient piece of equipment
TABLE 15.3
Area of Application of Attribute Difference Tests: How Does Attribute X Differ
between Samples?
Test
Areas of Application
1. Paired Comparison
test (2-AFC test)
One of the most-used attribute difference tests; used to show which of two
samples has more of the attribute under test (“Directional Difference
test”) or which of two samples is preferred (“Paired Preference test”);
test exists in one- or two-sided applications; generally 30 or more
subjects, can be used with as few as 15
2. Pairwise Ranking
test
Used to rank 3–6 samples according to intensity of one attribute; paired
ranking is simple to perform and the statistical analysis is
uncomplicated, but results are not as actionable as those obtained with
rating; generally 20 or more subjects, can be used with as few as 10
3. Simple Ranking test
Used to rank 3–6, certainly no more than eight, samples according to one
attribute; ranking is simple to perform, but results are not as actionable
as those obtained by rating; two samples of small or large difference in
the attribute will show the same difference in rank (i.e., one rank unit);
ranking is useful to presort or screen samples for more detailed tests;
generally 16 or more subjects, can be used with as few as 8
4. Rating of Several
Samples
Used to rate 3–6, certainly no more than eight, samples on a numerical
intensity scale according to one attribute; it is a requirement that all
samples be compared in one large set; generally 16 or more subjects,
can be used with as few as 8; may be used to compare descriptive
analyses of several samples, but note (Chapter 7, p. 117) that there will
be some carryover (halo effect) between the attributes
5. Balanced
Incomplete Block
As number 4, but used when there are too many samples (e.g., 7–15) to be
presented together in one sitting
6. Rating of Several
Samples, Balanced
Incomplete Block
As number 5, but used when there are too many samples (e.g., 7–15) to be
presented together in one sitting
The tests in this table are used to determine whether or not, or the degree to which, two or more samples differ
with respect to one deﬁned attribute. This may be a single attribute such as sweetness, or a combination of
several related attributes, such as freshness, or an overall evaluation, such as preference. With the exception of
preference, panelists must be carefully trained to recognize the selected attribute, and the results are valid only
to the extent that panelists understand and obey such instructions. A lack of difference in the selected attribute
does not imply that no overall difference exists. Samples need not be visibly identical, as only the selected
attribute is evaluated.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 15
410
