Respondents in segment 1 like products A, C, and G the most, and like products B, E, and F
the least. Respondents in segment 2 exhibit a narrower range of liking ratings than those in
segment 1. Respondents in segment 2 also like products A, C, and G the most but, unlike
segment 1, they like products D, H, and I the least.
14.3.2.3
From Perceptual Map to Preference Map
The ﬁnal step in the development of an external preference map is to ﬁt regression
equations to the average overall liking ratings of the total respondent base and all of the
consumer segments of interest in the study (demographic, attitudinal, usage, and prefer-
ence segments). The independent variables (i.e., the predictors) are the factor scores of the
test products obtained from the PCA. Both the linear and quadratic forms of the factor
scores are included in the regression analysis. Including the quadratic terms in the
regression model creates the opportunity to identify an intermediate point on the
sensory dimension that is predicted to be more well-liked than either extreme. Because
of this, regression models that include quadratic terms are called ideal point models.
Regression models that include only the linear terms are called vector models because
they can only point in the direction of increasing liking.
A variable-selection procedure such as stepwise regression or backward elimination is
used to identify the sensory dimensions that have a signiﬁcant relationship to overall
liking. When the number of products in the test is sufﬁciently large, backward elimination
is preferred to stepwise regression because is gives all of the predictors an equal chance of
ending up in the ﬁnal model (Anderson and Whitcomb 2005).
The results of the regression analysis for the total respondent base are presented in
Figure 14.18. Each line on the graph represents a sensory dimension that has a signiﬁcant
impact on overall liking. Steep lines have large impacts on liking; ﬂatter lines have smaller
impacts. Lines that slope up indicate that higher levels on the sensory dimension are more
well-liked than lower levels. Conversely, lines that slope down indicate that lower levels
are more well-liked. Curved lines indicate that an intermediate point is most well-liked. To
generate a line on the graph, hold all but one of the sensory dimensions constant and plot
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Segment 1 (n =48)
Segment 2 (n =52)
Segment
Total (n =100)
Overall liking
Sample B
Sample F
Sample E
Sample D
Sample I
Sample H
Sample J
Sample C
Sample A
Sample G
Overall liking by preference segments
FIGURE 14.17
The average liking ratings of the products by preference segment reveals that both segments like products A, C,
and G most. Segment 1 dislikes products B, E, and F. Segment 2 does not dislike any of the products but likes
products D, H, and I the least.
Advanced Statistical Methods
387
