awareness of the brand or product. Awareness is tracked relative to the competition: how a
brand image is changing; how usage patterns differ across target markets; and variables
deﬁning the target market including demographics. These studies are designed to capture
speciﬁc usage information, such as frequency of going to a fast food restaurant and menu
items ordered, or speciﬁc purchase behavior for chocolate chip cookies. Information
collected can be used as a basis of marketing planning, new product development, and
competitive intelligence. Although studies are set up strictly to measure attitudes and
usage, the questions used can be incorporated into a product study to determine if the
sample is tracking in a similar manner to the typical target audience.
12.7
Internet Research
12.7.1
Introduction/Deﬁnition/Purpose
The Internet is one more way to reach the targeted audience. Internet research uses
surveys distributed or posted via the World Wide Web to gather information from consu-
mers regarding a particular product or product concept. The use of the internet to conduct
research has been growing in popularity over the last decade. Despite the doubt of some
researchers regarding the validity of the data collected, use of the internet for Web-based
surveys has continued to grow. According to MacEvoy (2000), in those countries where
Internet penetration exceeds 20% of the population, online results tend to yield very
similar results as those obtained from more traditional pen-and-paper methods.
In addition, the United States has reported a lower response rate and a growing lack of
cooperation with more traditional methods of data analysis on the whole, while use
of Internet-based surveys has increased.
The Internet can be a valuable tool when conducting consumer research. There are a
number of potential beneﬁts to conducting consumer research using the Internet. There
are four major assumptions about how Internet surveys surpass more traditional survey
methods: (1) they are less time consuming; (2) they are equally valid or may even be more
valid than traditional survey methods; (3) they can be more cost effective to conduct; and
(4) they are more easily executed. These assumptions may or may not be true, and depend
greatly upon the particular circumstances of the survey (Schonlau 2002).
When conducting Web-based surveys for gathering quantitative data via automatic data
entry into a database, the beneﬁts are numerous. Not only is the data entry automatic,
which limits errors resulting from hand-entered data, but the data turnaround is much
faster than traditional methods (Solomon 2001).
One key advantage to Internet Research is access to a broader audience and a more
diverse demographic proﬁle. These individuals may be harder to reach using more
traditional methods. With no geographic barriers and no travel time for consumers,
more people are able to participate in online surveys that otherwise live too far away
from a testing facility to participate (Gucwa 1999; Sweet and Walkowski 2000).
Another beneﬁt is the capability for sampling an incredibly large population of thousands
of consumers, which would be unfathomable using more traditional methods (Taylor 2000).
Researchers must keep in mind that there are entire populations of consumers
who do not have access to the Internet or to email and will not have access to the
surveys. Many of those who do not have Internet access belong to particular ethnic
and socioeconomic groups, thereby skewing survey demographics toward those respon-
dents who do have access to the Internet—in particular, white, middle-class consumers
(Solomon 2001).
Affective Tests: Internet Research
281
