Variability. With several evaluations of a blind control or reference, the panelist’s varia-
bility about his/her own mean rating is calculated using the panelist’s standard deviation
as follows:
panelist SD; s Z
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
n
iZ1
ðxiKxÞ2=ðnK1Þ:
s
(9.2)
Good panelists have both low bias and low variability. The bias formula may be
modiﬁed by removing the sign; this produces the absolute bias, calculated as
panelist bias; jdj Z jxKmj;
(9.3)
so that large positive and negative deviations do not offset each other. Small values of
absolute bias are desirable. The panelists’ statistics should be plotted over time to identify
those panelists who need retraining or calibration.
When split-plot analysis of variance is used for descriptive data analysis, the judge-
by-sample interaction is part of the results. When this interaction is signiﬁcant, it is necess-
ary to look at plots of the data to determine the source(s). Figure 9.2 shows three plots of
judge-by-sample interactions. In each graph, each line represents one panelist’s
average ratings for two samples. In the ﬁrst plot (A), the judge-by-sample interaction is
not signiﬁcant. All judges tend to rate the samples in the same direction and with the same
relative degrees of intensity. Thus the lines are in the same direction and similar in slope.
The second plot (B) shows an extreme case of judge-by-sample interaction: Several
samples are rated quite differently by some of the judges. Consequently, the lines run in
different directions and have different slopes. The third plot (C) shows a few judges
whose slopes differ from the rest. In this case, although the judge-by-sample interaction
is statistically signiﬁcant, the problem is less extreme. It is one of slight differences in the use
of scales rather than total reversals, as in plot B. Generally, a judge-by-sample interaction
indicates the need for more training, more frequent use of reference scales, or review
of terminology.
9.5.2
Panelist Maintenance, Feedback, Rewards, and Motivation
One of the major sources of motivation for panelists is a sense of doing meaningful work.
After a project is completed, panelists should be informed by letter or a posted circular of
the project and test objectives, the test results, and the contribution made by the sensory
results to the decision taken regarding the product. Immediate feedback after each test also
tends to give the individual panelist a sense of “How am I doing?” The fears of some
project leaders that panelists might become discouraged in tests with a low probability of
success (a triangle test often has fewer than 50% correct responses) have proven ground-
less. Panelists do take into account the complexity of the sample, the difﬁculty of the test,
and the probability of success. Panelists do want to know about the test, and can indeed
learn from past performance. Discussion of results after a descriptive panel session is
highly recommended. The need to constantly reﬁne the terms, procedures, and deﬁnitions
is best served by regular panel interaction after all the data have been collected.
Feedback to panelists on performance can be provided with data regarding their indi-
vidual performance over three to ﬁve repeat evaluations of the same product vis-a`-vis the
panel as a whole. The data in Table 9.8 for a given sample indicates the mean and standard
deviation for each panelist (numbers) for each attribute (letters), as well as the panel mean
Selection and Training of Panel Members: Panel Performance and Motivation
155
