14.4.2.1
Constructing Fractional Factorials
Most screening studies are performed by selecting two levels, low and high, for each
experimental variable. The various treatment combinations of low and high levels make
up the experimental design. That is, the treatment combinations deﬁne the levels of the
experimental variables that should be used to produce each of the experimental samples.
A convenient notation has been developed to identify the levels of the factors in each
treatment combination. The high level of a variable A is denoted by the lower case a, the
high level of B by b, etc. The low level of a variable is denoted by the absence of the lower-
case letter. For example, in a 23 factorial, the treatment combination high-A, high-B, high-C
would be denoted as abc; the treatment combination low-A, high-B, high-C would be
denoted as bc; and the treatment combination low-A, low-B, high-C would be
denoted by c. The symbol used to represent the combination of all factors at their low
levels is (1).
The eight treatment combinations that make up a single replication of a 23 factorial
experiment are presented in the ﬁrst column of Table 14.8. The remaining columns
contain the signs of the coefﬁcients that would be used to estimate each of the factorial
effects. (The coefﬁcients are either K1 or C1; therefore, only the sign is needed.) The
treatment combinations are grouped by the sign of the coefﬁcient for estimating the
three-way interaction ABC. The two groups formed in this way are each 1⁄2-replications
of a 23 factorial. Either of the two groups of four treatment combinations could be selected
for use in a screening study. Cochran and Cox (1957) present plans for fractional factorial
experiments for both 2n and 3n experiments where the number of factors, n, is as large
as eight.
B Effect 2
A Effect 2
B Effect 1
A Effect 1
C Effect 1
C Effect 2
A
B
C
FIGURE 14.24
A graphical display of a 1⁄2-replicate fractional factorial of a 23 experiment showing by projection that two
differences remain for estimating each main effect even though the total experiment has been reduced from
eight to four samples.
Advanced Statistical Methods
397
