of “B” are prepared to make 12 sets that are distributed at random among the subjects,
using two each of the combinations ABB, BAA, AAB, BBA, ABA, and BAB.
Eight subjects correctly identify the odd sample. In Table 17.8, the conclusion is that the
two beers are different at the 5% level of signiﬁcance.
Example 6.2: Detailed Example of Triangle Difference Test—Foil vs. Paper
Wraps for Candy Bars
Problem/situation: The director of packaging of a confection company wishes to test the
effectiveness of a new foil-lined packaging material against the paper wrap currently
being used for candy bars. Preliminary observation shows that paper-wrapped bars
begin to show harder texture after 3 months while foil-wrapped bars remain soft. The
director feels that if he can show a signiﬁcant difference at 3 months, he can justify a switch
in wrap for the product.
Project objective: To determine if the change in packaging causes an overall difference in
ﬂavor and/or texture after 3 months of shelf storage.
Test objective: To measure if people can differentiate between the two three-month-old
products by tasting them.
Test design is a triangle difference test with 30–36 subjects. The test will be conducted
under normal white lighting to allow for differences in appearance to be taken into
account. The subjects will be scheduled in groups of six to ensure full randomization
within groups. Signiﬁcance for a difference will be determined at an a risk of 5%, i.e.,
this test will falsely conclude a difference only 5% of the time.
Screen samples: Inspect samples initially (before packaging) to ensure that no gross
sensory differences are noticeable from sample to sample. Evaluate test samples at 3
months to ensure that no gross sensory characteristics have developed that would
render the test invalid.
Name
Type of sample
Instructions
Taste samples from left to right.Two are identical;
determine which is the odd sample.
If no difference apparent, you must guess.
Date
Comments
Sets of three
samples
Which is the
odd sample?
Triangle test
FIGURE 6.1
Example of scoresheet for three triangle tests.
Overall Difference Tests: Triangle Test
67
