12
Affective Tests: Consumer Tests and In-House Panel
Acceptance Tests
12.1
Purpose and Applications
The primary purpose of affective tests is to assess the personal response (preference or
acceptance) of current or potential customers to a product, a product idea, or speciﬁc
product characteristics.
Affective tests are used mainly by producers of consumer goods, but also by service
providers such as hospitals, banks, and the Armed Forces, where many tests were ﬁrst
developed (Chapter 1, p. 1). Every year, the use of consumer tests becomes more common.
They have proven highly effective as a tool used to design products and services that will
sell in larger quantities or command a higher price. Prosperous companies tend to
excel in consumer-testing knowledge and, consequently, in knowledge about
their consumers.
This chapter establishes rough guidelines for the design of consumer tests and in-house
affective tests. More detailed discussions are given by Amerine, Pangborn, and Roessler
(1965), Schaefer (1979), Moskowitz (1983), Civille, Mun˜oz, and Chambers (1987), Wu and
Gelinas (1989, 1992), Stone and Sidel (1993), Resurreccion (1998), and Lawless and
Heymann (1999). One question that divides these authors is the use of in-house panels
for acceptance testing. This chapter adopts the opinion that the appropriate choice of a
panel is dependent about the product category being tested: Baron Rothschild does not
rely on consumer tests for his wines, but ConAgra and Kraft Foods need them. For the
average company’s products, the amount of testing generated by intended and unavoid-
able variations in process and raw materials far exceeds the capacity of consumer panels,
so in-house panels are appropriate for most jobs and are calibrated against consumer tests
as often as possible.
Results from consumer tests are more widely used than ever before. With the constantly
changing marketplace offering more variety, niche products, and increasingly discrimi-
nating consumers, it is becoming more difﬁcult to predict consumer preferences. This
change in the market has increased the emphasis on the collection of consumer opinions.
Consumer studies are expensive, with costs increasing an average of 5–10% annually. The
result is that there are many options available, and exploration into alternative approaches
is an ongoing endeavor. Most people today have participated in some form of consumer
test. Typically, a test involves 100–500 target consumers divided over three or four cities. A
target consumer represents the population for whom the product is intended. The use of
qualitative and quantitative testing including in-house panels, home use tests, focus
groups and online research is expanding. Researchers have a responsibility to ensure
255
