2. Intensity response to attribute:
Strength: How strong/intense is the crispness of this cracker?
[None///Very strong]
3. Appropriateness of intensity:
Just right: Rate the sweetness of this cereal:
[Not at all sweet enough///Much too sweet]
Figure 12.4 shows examples of attribute questions; others are discussed in Section 12.6.1.
In the ﬁrst example—a preference questionnaire with two samples—respondents are
asked, for each attribute, which sample they prefer. In the second example—an “attribute
diagnostics” questionnaire with a single sample—respondents rate each attribute on a
scale from “like extremely” to “dislike extremely.” Such questionnaires are considered
less effective in determining the importance of each attribute because subjects often rate
the attributes similar to the overall response, and the result is a series of attributes that
have a “halo” of the general response. In addition, if one attribute does receive a negative
rating, the researcher has no way of determining the direction of the dislike. If a product
texture is disliked, is it “too hard” or “too soft”?—“too thick” or “too thin”?
The “just right” scales shown in the third and fourth examples (see also Vickers 1988)
allow the researcher to assess the intensity of an attribute relative to some mental criterion
of the subjects. “Just right” scales cannot be analyzed by calculating the mean response, as
the scale might be unbalanced or unevenly spaced, depending on the relative intensities
and appropriateness of each attribute in the mind of the consumer. The following
procedure is recommended:
1. Calculate the percentage of subjects who respond in each category of the
attribute.
Example of Results for Attribute “Just Right” Scales
% Response
5
15
40
25
15
Category
Much too
little
Somewhat too
little
Just right
Somewhat too
much
Much too
much
2. Using a c2-test (see Chapter 13), compare the distribution of responses to that
obtained by a successful brand.
A similar approach is to use an intensity scale (without midpoint) for each attribute (the
ﬁfth example). To assess the appropriateness of these attributes, the intensity values must
be related to overall acceptance or to acceptance for that attribute. The studies conducted
by General Foods on the consumer texture proﬁle method (Szczesniak, Skinner, and Loew
1975) related consumer intensity ratings to their own ratings for an ideal; it showed high
correlations between acceptance ratings and the degree to which various products
approached the consumer’s ideal.
12.6.5
Other Information
Attitudes and images of a brand or product category may change over time. Market
researchers conduct frequent tracking studies, called Attitude and Usage (A&U), Attitude,
Awareness and Usage (AAU) and Usage and Attitude (U&A), on a regular basis to monitor
consumer perceptions and behaviors. An A&U study, when periodically repeated,
provides a means to capture how marketing activities are inﬂuencing the consumer’s
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
280
