7
Attribute Difference Tests: How Does Attribute X
Differ between Samples?
7.1
Introduction: Paired Comparison Designs
Attribute difference tests measure a single attribute, e.g., sweetness, comparing one
sample with one or several others. The lack of a difference between samples with
regard to one attribute does not imply that no overall difference exists. Attribute difference
tests involving two samples (Section 7.2) are simple regarding test design and statistical
treatment; the main difﬁculty is that of determining whether test situations are one-sided
or two-sided (see next page and Example 7.1 and Example 7.2).
With more than two samples, some designs can be analyzed by the analysis of variance
whereas others require specialized statistics. The degree of complexity increases rapidly
with sample numbers, as does the economy of testing, which is possible by improved test
designs. A description of the various multiple pair tests follows; multisample tests and
their designs are discussed in Section 7.4.
In Section 7.3 and Section 7.4, the subjects are asked to compare each sample with every
other sample. Such paired comparisons provide good measures for the intensity of the
attribute of interest for each sample on a meaningful scale and they have the advantage
that a measure is obtained of the relative intensity of the attribute within each pair that can
be formed. However, the number of possible pairs increases polynomially with the
number of samples:
Number of samples, t
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Number of possible
pairs, NZ t (tK1)/2
3
6
10
15
21
28
36
In Section 7.3 and Section 7.4, the question “Which sample is sweeter (fresher,
preferred)?” is asked. This approach is based on rank data (e.g., the sweeter sample is
assigned rank 2 and the other sample, rank 1), which introduces a degree of artiﬁciality; no
measure of the degree of difference is obtained directly from each respondent. In return,
the statistics are simpler. With rating data, specialized statistics become necessary.
7.2
Directional Difference Test: Comparing Two Samples
7.2.1
Scope and Application
Use this method when the test objective is to determine in which way a particular sensory
characteristic differs between two samples (e.g., which sample is sweeter). In this mode,
105
