criteria. These respondents are most often selected from a database and contacted directly
to participate, or they are recruited from a central location such as a shopping mall.
The advantage of this approach is the ability to test with product users or potential
users; the disadvantage is the added cost to recruit. It is important to include the
appropriate screening criteria to eliminate professional evaluators.
12.3
Choice of Test Location
The test location or test site has numerous effects on the results, not only because of its
geographic location, but also because the place in which the test is conducted deﬁnes
several other aspects of product sampling and perceived sensory properties. It is possible
to get different results from different test sites with a given set of samples and consumers.
These differences occur as a result of differences in:
† The length of time the products are used/tested
† Controlled preparation vs. normal-use preparation of the product
† The perception of the product alone in a central location vs. in conjunction with
other foods or personal care items in the home
† The inﬂuence of family members on each other in the home
† The length and complexity of the questionnaire
For a more detailed discussion, see Resurreccion (1998).
12.3.1
Laboratory Tests
The advantages of laboratory tests are:
† Product preparation and presentation can be carefully controlled.
† Employees can be contacted on short notice to participate.
† Color and other visual aspects that may not be fully under control in a prototype
can be masked so that subjects can concentrate on the ﬂavor or texture
differences under investigation.
The disadvantages of laboratory tests are:
† The location suggests that the test products originate in the company or speciﬁc
plant, which may inﬂuence biases and expectations because of previous experi-
ence. Experience with and knowledge of product(s) often results in increased
sensitivities to differences. The reaction to perceived differences may not accu-
rately reﬂect the target population.
† The lack of normal consumption (e.g., sip test rather than consumption of a full
portion)
may
inﬂuence
the
detection
or
evaluation
of
positive
or
negative attributes.
† Standardized preparation procedures and product handling protocols might not
necessarily mimic consumer behavior and experience at home.
Affective Tests: Choice of Test Location
263
