However, grading suffers from the considerable drawback that statistical correlation with
measurable physical or chemical properties is difﬁcult or impossible. Consequently, many
of the time-honored grading scales are being replaced by the methods described in this
book. Examples of good grading methods still in use are the Torry scale for freshness of
ﬁsh (Sanders and Smith 1976), and the USDA scales for butter (USDA 1977) and meat
(USDA undated).
5.5
Ranking
In ranking, subjects receive three or more samples that are to be arranged in order of
intensity or degree of some speciﬁed attribute. For example, four samples of yogurt are
to be ranked for degree of sensory acidity, or ﬁve samples of breakfast cereal may be
ranked for preference. A full description of ranking tests and their statistical treatment
will be found in Chapter 7.
For each subject, the sample ranked ﬁrst is accorded a “1,” that ranked second a
“2,” and so on. The rank numbers received by each sample are summed, and
the resulting rank sums indicate the overall rank order of the samples. Rank
orders cannot meaningfully be used as a measure of intensity, but they are amenable
to signiﬁcance tests such as the c2-test (see Chapter 13) and Friedman’s test
(see Chapter 7).
Ranking tests are rapid and demand relatively little training, although it should not be
forgotten that the subjects must be thoroughly familiarized with the attribute under test.
Ranking tests have wide application, but with sample sets above three, they do not
discriminate as well as tests based on the use of scales.
5.6
Scaling
Scaling techniques involve the use of numbers or words to express the intensity of a
perceived attribute (sweetness, hardness, smoothness) or a reaction to such attribute
(e.g., too soft, just right, too hard). If words are used, the analyst may assign numerical
values to the words (e.g., like extremelyZ9, dislike extremelyZ1) so that the data can be
treated statistically. As this is written, methods of scaling are under intensive study around
the world (ISO 1999; Mun˜oz and Civille 1998) and the recommendations that follow
should be seen as preliminary.
The validity and reliability of a scaling technique are highly dependent upon:
† The selection of a scaling technique that is broad enough to encompass the full
range of parameter intensities and also has enough discrete points to pick up all
the small differences in intensity between samples.
† The degree to which the panel has or has not been taught to associate a particular
sensation (and none other) with the attribute being scaled.
† The degree to which the panel has or has not been trained to use the scale in
the same way across all samples and across time (see Chapter 9 on panelist
training).
Measuring Responses
55
