you do not know what a mad-lib is: Find an 8 year old—they know.
Laughter is guaranteed.
† Ask your panelists to create a collage that illustrates what a complex sensory
experience such as creamy, fresh, refreshing, moisturized, soft, means to
them. Ask each panelist to explain his or her collage and then hang on
the wall to create one big collage. What sensory characteristics do they
see? What sensory insights do you see?
† Invite an expert to talk to your panel. Experts include perfumers, chefs, wine
sommeliers, ﬂoral designers, fashion designers, sound mixers, etc.
† Play a game of sensory charades.
† Have a “Design the Worst_______________” (product) contest. Have your
panelists work in teams to create a worst sensory experience on a product.
Give them 10 min.
† Bring in paint chips (many different colors) and ask your panelists to come
up with their own names. Give them a theme: Food names only, vacation
place names, etc.
† And, just for fun, play “The Name Game.” Prepare nametags with the pane-
lists’ names written on them. Place a nametag on their backs (don’t put their
own name on their back). The object of game is to ﬁnd out whose name they
have on their back by asking only yes or no questions.
C
Panel Guidelines
Company L provides panelists with a safe, pleasant working environment and offers
panelists the ﬂexibility to choose the studies in which they wish to participate.
Arrival Time
† Panelists are asked to arrive for panel 10 min before session is scheduled.
† Coats and sweaters need to be hung up in the hall closet.
† Prepare sites with templates.
† Panelists are responsible for signing in and out on the time sheet. Because
payment is based on timesheets, it is imperative for panelists to record their
participation in order to be paid.
Scheduling of Practice and Product Orientation
† These sessions are designed to review the attributes and provide feedback
regarding the issues that may come about during a study.
† Practice sessions will be scheduled as needed.
† Full attendance at product orientation sessions prior to studies is required in
order to participate in the study. If you cannot make all of the scheduled orien-
tation sessions, you will be unable to participate in the study.
Scheduling of Study
† Client evaluations are scheduled with the panel leader.
† The panel leader informs the panel of any upcoming studies and the require-
ments. Typically, a study requires a panel of 10 panelists to provide data about
the samples.
Selection and Training of Panel Members: Panel Leadership Advice
167
