The creative and diligent sensory analyst can construct the optimal descriptive tech-
nique by selecting from the spectrum of terms, scaling techniques, and other optional
components that are available at the start of each panel development.
11.6
Modiﬁed Short-Version Spectrum Descriptive Procedures for
Quality Assurance, Shelf-Life Studies, etc.
Certain applications of descriptive analysis require evaluation of a few detailed attri-
butes without a full analysis of all the parameters of ﬂavor, texture, and/or appearance.
The tracking or monitoring of product changes, necessary in QC/QA sensory work
and in shelf-life studies, can provide the required information by logging a small
number of selected sensory properties over time. The modiﬁed or short-version
descriptive procedure, in any situation, must be based on work performed with a
fully trained descriptive panel, generally in R&D, which characterizes all of the
product’s attributes. After the panel has evaluated a succession of products typical of
the full range of sensory properties, e.g., several production samples from all plants
and through the practical aging and storage conditions encountered, the sensory
analyst and project team can select ﬁve to ten key parameters, that together deﬁne
the range or qualities from “typical” to “off.” Future monitoring of just those para-
meters then permits QA/QC and R&D to identify any changes that require
troubleshooting and correction.
Use of the modiﬁed Spectrum descriptive technique was described by Mun˜oz,
Civille, and Carr (1992) for two applications: a comprehensive descriptive procedure
and a difference-from-control procedure. In the comprehensive descriptive procedure,
a reduced set of characteristics is selected by testing the production variability for most
characteristics among consumers and then choosing those characteristics whose varia-
bility most affects consumer acceptance. These relationships are used to set sensory
speciﬁcations that allow the QC sensory program to monitor production. The intensity
of the key sensory attributes are measured to determine whether production
samples fall in or out of speciﬁcation, and for what attributes. Such a technique
permits detection and deﬁnition of any problem areas that can then be related to
processing or raw materials sources. The comprehensive descriptive procedure may
also be applied to the sensory properties of incoming raw materials and/or
in-process batches.
In the second application, the modiﬁed Spectrum descriptive is coupled with a
difference-from-control test. The modiﬁed descriptive panel is trained to recognize the
control or standard product along with other samples that the fully trained panel has
described as different from the control on the key attributes. The panel is shown the full
range of samples and asked to rate them using the normal difference-from-control scale
(see Chapter 6, p. 93). The panel understands that, occasionally, one of the test samples
during normal testing of production will be a blind control and/or one of the original
“small difference” or “large difference” demonstration samples. This precaution reduces
the likelihood of panelists anticipating too much change in shelf-life studies or too little
change in production.
The difference-from-control test provides an indication of the magnitude of the
difference from the standard product. Samples may on occasion show statistical signi-
ﬁcance for a difference from the control and yet remain acceptable to consumers. The
product team can submit to consumer testing three or more products, identiﬁed by the
panel as showing slight, moderate, and large differences from the control. In place of
The Spectrume Descriptive Analysis Method: Modiﬁed Short-Version Spectrum
193
