which is greater than the value in Table 17.5 (dfZ1, probabilityZ0.05, c2Z3.84), i.e., a
signiﬁcant difference exists.
Interpret results: The results show a signiﬁcant difference between the barbecue sauces
prepared in the two different cookers. The sensory analyst informs the plant manager that
the equipment supplier’s claim is not true. A difference has been detected between the two
products. The analyst suggests that if the substitution of the new cooker remains an
important cost/efﬁciency item in the plant, the two barbecue sauces should be tested
for preference among users. A consumer test resulting in parity for the two sauces or in
preference for the sauce from the new cooker would permit the plant to implement
the process.
Note: If Example 6.10 had been run with 30 subjects rather than 60, and with each of the
30 receiving both a matched and an unmatched pair in separate sessions, the results could
have been the same as above, but the c2-test would have been inappropriate and a
McNemar test would be indicated (Conover 1980). To perform the McNemar procedure,
the analyst must keep track of both responses from each panelist and tally them in the
following format:
Subject Received A/B or B/A and Responded
Same
Different
Subject received
A/A or B/B
and responded
Same
aZ2
bZ15
Different
cZ7
dZ6
The test statistic is
McNemar’s T Z ðbKcÞ2=ðb CcÞ:
For (bCc)R20, the assumption of no difference is rejected if T is greater than the critical
value of a c2 with one degree of freedom from Table 17.5. For (bCc)!20, a binomial
procedure is applied (see Conover 1980). For the present example:
McNemar’s T Z ð15K7Þ2=ð15 C7Þ Z 2:91;
which is less than c2
1;0:05Z3:84. Therefore, one cannot conclude that the samples
are different.
If the paired data from the 30 panelists had been treated as if they were individual
observations from 60 panelists, one would have obtained the data as presented under
“Analyze results,” p. 91. The standard c2-analysis would have led to the incorrect con-
clusion that a statistically signiﬁcant difference existed between the samples.
6.7
“A”–“Not A” Test
6.7.1
Scope and Application
Use this method (ISO 1987) when the test objective is to determine whether a sensory
difference exists between two products, particularly when these are unsuitable for dual or
triple presentation, i.e., when the duo–trio and triangle tests cannot be used. Examples of
such situations are comparisons of products with a strong and/or lingering ﬂavor,
samples that need to be applied to the skin in half-face tests, products that differ slightly
in appearance, and samples that are very complex stimuli and are mentally confusing to
the panelists. Use the “A”–“not A” test in preference to the same/different test
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 6
88
