where t, k, r, l, and p were deﬁned previously and Rj is the rank sum of the jth sample (i.e.,
the value for sample j in the last row of Table 13.14) (see Durbin 1951). Tables of critical
values of T in Equation 13.18 are available for selected combinations of tZ3–6, kZ2–5, and
pZ1–7 (see Skillings and Mack 1981). However, in most sensory studies, the total number
of blocks exceeds the values in the tables. For these situations, the test procedure is to reject
the assumption of equivalency among the samples if T in Equation 13.18 exceeds the
upper-a critical value of a c2-statistic with (tK1) degrees of freedom (see Table 17.5).
If the c2-statistic is signiﬁcant, then a multiple comparison procedure is performed to
determine which of the samples differ signiﬁcantly. The nonparametric analog to Fisher’s
LSD for rank sums from a BIB design is
LSDrank Z za=2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pðk C1ÞðrkKr ClÞ=6
p
Z ta=2;N
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
pðk C1ÞðrkKr ClÞ=6
p
:
(13.19)
13.5.5
Latin-Square Designs
In randomized block and balanced incomplete block designs, a single source of variability
(i.e., judges) is recognized and compensated for before the sensory panel study is
conducted. When two sources of variability are known to exist before the panel is run,
then a Latin-square design should be used. For example, it is commonly recognized that
panelists can vary in how they perceive attributes from session to session (i.e., a session
effect) and according to the order in which they evaluate the samples (i.e., a context effect).
A Latin-square design can be used to compensate for these two sources of variability and,
as a result, yield more sensitive comparisons of the differences among the samples.
The number of samples must be small enough so that all of them can be evaluated in
each session (t%5, typically). Furthermore, each panelist must be able to return repeatedly
for a number of sessions equal to the number of samples in the study (i.e., t represents the
number of samples and the number of sessions in a Latin-square design). For each pane-
list, each sample is presented once in each session. Across the t-sessions, each sample is
presented once in each serving position. As can be seen in Figure 13.14, the equal allo-
cation of the samples to each serving order/session combination can be displayed in a
square array, thus giving rise to the term “Latin-square.”
A separate randomization of serving orders is used for each judge. This can be carried
out, for example, by ﬁrst randomly assigning the codes S1, S2, S3, S4, and S5 in Figure 13.14
to the samples for each judge separately. Then, again for each judge, a particular order
(i.e., row of Figure 13.14) is randomly selected for each session.
ANOVA is used to analyze data from a Latin-square design (see Table 13.16). The total
variability is partitioned into the separate effects of judges, panel sessions, order of evalu-
ations, samples, and error. If the F-statistic in Table 13.16 exceeds the critical value of an
F with the corresponding degrees of freedom, then the null hypothesis assumption of
equivalent mean ratings among the samples is rejected. Fisher’s LSD for Latin-square
designs has the form:
LSD Z ta=2;dfE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2MSE=pt
p
;
where p is the number of panelists.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 13
346
