meet the needs of target populations, select markets, or carefully chosen segments of the
population. Such criteria require that the sensory analyst ﬁrst determine the population for
whom the product (or service) is intended; e.g., for a sweetened breakfast cereal, the target
population may be children between the ages of 4 and 12; for a sushi and yogurt blend, the
select market may be southern California; and for a high-priced jewelry item, article of
clothing, or automobile, the segment of the general population may be young, 25–35,
upwardly mobile professionals, both married and unmarried.
Consumer researchers who are faced with the task of balancing the need to identify and
use a sample of consumers who represent the target population with the cost of having a
very precise demographic model, use a screener. Proper screening requires thought and
input not only from the consumer researcher, but also from the client such as product
development or market research. The information collected from the screening process
helps determine similarities and differences among groups of people and the subsequent
inﬂuence of those similarities and differences on product liking and purchase. An effective
screener starts with a clear understanding of the research objective. Detailed screening
criteria for qualitative and quantitative tests may differ, however there is a series of broad
questions that are typically asked, such as age, gender, occupation/profession, ethnicity,
income, general usage, sensitivities, time availability, and willingness to participate. With
widely used products such as cold cereals, soft drinks, beer, cookies, and facial tissues,
research guidance consumer tests may require selection only of users or potential users of
the product brand or category. The cost of stricter demographic criteria may be justiﬁed for
the later stages of consumer research guidance or for marketing research tests. Among the
demographics to be considered in selecting sample subjects are:
User group. Based on the rate of consumption or use of a product by different groups
within the population, brand managers often classify users as light, moderate, or heavy
users. These terms are highly dependent on the product type and its normal consumption
(see Table 12.1). For products that are continually changing, such as electronics, the lead
users will provide the most useful information for new product concepts. The lead-user
segment recognizes a need well before the general population and attempts to ﬁll that
need. Another target group includes dissatisﬁed users who may use a product because of
lack of a better substitute in the market place. Market researchers may seek out this group
for innovative ideation. For specialty products or new products with low incidence in the
population, the cost of consumer testing radically increases because many people must be
contacted before the appropriate sample of users can be found.
Age. The ages of 4–12 are best to test toys, sweets, and cereals; teenagers at 12–19 buy
clothes, magazines, snacks, soft drinks, and entertainment. Young adults at 20–35 receive
the most attention in consumer tests: (1) because of population numbers; (2) because of
higher consumption made possible by the absence of family costs; and (3) because lifelong
habits and loyalties are formed in this age range. Above age 35, consumers buy houses and
TABLE 12.1
Typical Frequency Use of Various Consumer Products
User
Product
Classi-
ﬁcation
Coffee
Peanut Butter,
Air Freshener
Macaroni and
Cheese
Rug Deodorizer
Light
Up to 1 cup/day
1–4!/month
Once/2 months
1!/year
Moderate
2– 5 cups/day
1–6!/week
1–4!/month
2–4!/year
Heavy
5 cups/day
1! or more/day
Over 2!/week
1!/month or more
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
260
