their intensities, order of appearance, and aftertaste. Additional samples can be sub-
sequently evaluated in the same session, but samples are not tasted back and forth. The
results are reported to the panel leader who then leads a general discussion of the panel to
arrive at a consensus proﬁle for each sample. The data is generally reported in tabular
form, although a graphic representation is possible.
The ﬂavor proﬁle method may be applied when a panel must evaluate many different
products with none that are a major producer’s major line. The main advantage, but also a
major limitation, of the Flavor Proﬁle method is that it only uses ﬁve to eight panelists. The
lack of consistency and reproducibility that this limitation entails is somewhat overcome
by training and by the consensus method. However, the latter has been criticized for one-
sidedness. The panel’s opinion may become dominated by that of a senior member or a
dominant personality, and equal input from other panel members is not always obtained.
Other points of criticism of the Flavor Proﬁle are that screening methods do not include
tests for the ability to discriminate speciﬁc aroma or ﬂavor differences that may be import-
ant in speciﬁc product applications and the seven-point scale limits the degree of
discrimination among products showing small, but important, differences.
10.4.2
The Texture Proﬁle Method
Based somewhat on the principles of the ﬂavor proﬁle method, the texture proﬁle method
was developed by the Product Evaluation and Texture Technology groups at General Foods
Corp. to deﬁne the textural parameters of foods (Skinner 1988). Later, the method was
expanded by Civille and Szczesniak (1973) and Civille and Liska (1975) to include speciﬁc
attribute descriptors for speciﬁc products including semisolid foods, beverages, skinfeel
products (Schwartz 1975; ASTM 1997a), and fabric and paper goods (Civille and Dus 1990).
In all cases, the terminology is speciﬁc for each product type, but it is based on the under-
lying rheological properties expressed in the ﬁrst Texture Proﬁle publications (Brandt,
Skinner, and Coleman 1963; Szczesniak 1963; Szczesniak, Brandt, and Friedman 1963).
Panelists are selected on the basis of their ability to discriminate known textural
differences in the speciﬁc product application that the panel is to be trained for (solid
foods, beverages, semisolids, skin care products, fabrics, paper, etc.). As with most other
descriptive analysis techniques, panelists are interviewed to determine interest, avai-
lability, and attitude. Panelists selected for training are exposed to a wide range of
products from the category under investigation to provide a wide frame of reference. In
addition, panelists are introduced to the underlying textural principles involved in the
structure of the products under study. This learning experience provides panelists with an
understanding of the concepts of input mechanical forces and resulting strain on the
product. In turn, panelists are able to avoid lengthy discussions about redundant terms
and to select the most technically appropriate and descriptive terms for the evaluation of
products. Panelists also deﬁne all terms and all procedures for evaluation, therefore,
reducing some of the variability encountered in most descriptive testing. The reference
scales used in the training of panelists can later serve as references for approximate scale
values that further reduce panel variability.
Each panelist, using one of the scaling techniques previously discussed, independently
evaluates samples. The original Texture Proﬁle method used an expanded 13-point version
of the Flavor Proﬁle scale. In the last several years, however, Texture Proﬁle panels have
been trained using category, line, and ME scales (see Chapter 11, Appendix 11.2, for food
texture references for use with a 15-point or 15-cm line scale). Depending on the type of scale
used by the panel and on the way the data is to be treated, the panel verdicts may be derived
by group consensus, as with the Flavor Proﬁle method, or by statistical analysis of the data.
For ﬁnal reports, the data may be displayed in tabular or graphic form.
Descriptive Analysis Techniques
179
