from the ANOVA, and ni and nj are the number of observations that went into the calcu-
lation of xi and xj, respectively. If the sample sizes are the same for all x’s, then Equation
13.11 reduces to
LSDa Z ta=2;dfE
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2MSE=n
p
;
(13.12)
where
n
is
the
common
sample
size.
In
the
example,
nZ30,
so
the
LSD0:05Z1:96 ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ð2:23Þ=30
p
Z0:76. Any two samples whose means differ by more than
0.76 are signiﬁcantly different at the 5% level. As shown in Table 13.11, Chicago has a
signiﬁcantly lower average value than the other three cities, and Boston has a signiﬁcantly
lower average value than Denver.
Completely randomized designs are seldom used in multisample studies involving
sensory panels because it is inefﬁcient to have each panelist evaluate only a single
sample, and yet it is recognized that different panelists might use different parts of the
rating scales to express their perceptions. More elaborate panel designs are needed for
such studies. Four of the most commonly used designs for sensory panels are discussed in
the remainder of this section.
13.5.3
Randomized (Complete) Block Designs
If the number of samples is sufﬁciently small such that sensory fatigue is not a concern,
then a randomized (complete) block design is appropriate. Panelists are the “blocks”;
samples are the “treatments.” Each panelist evaluates (either by rating or ranking) all of
the samples (hence the term “complete block”).
A randomized block design is effective when the sensory analyst is conﬁdent that the
panelists are consistent in rating the samples but recognizes that panelists might use
different parts of the scale to express their perceptions. The analysis applied to data
from a randomized block design takes into account this type of judge-to-judge difference,
yielding a more accurate estimate of experimental error and thus more sensitive tests of
hypotheses than would otherwise be available.
Independently replicated samples of the test products are presented to the panelists in a
randomized order (using a separate randomization for each panelist). The data obtained
from the panelists’ evaluations can be arranged in a two-way table as in Table 13.12.
13.5.3.1
Randomized Block Analysis of Ratings
Data in the form of ratings from a randomized block design are analyzed by ANOVA. The
form of the ANOVA table appropriate for a randomized block design is presented in
Table 13.13. The null hypothesis is that the mean ratings for all of the samples are equal
(H0: miZmj for all samples i and j) vs. the alternative hypothesis that the mean ratings of at
least two of the samples are different (Ha: mismj for some pair of distinct samples i and j).
TABLE 13.11
Average Overall Liking Scores from the Multicity Monadic Consumer Test
Data in Table 13.1
City
Atlanta
Boston
Chicago
Denver
Mean rating
10.56B C
10.29 B
7.17 A
11.12 C
Note:
Means not followed by the same letter are signiﬁcantly different at the 5% level.
Basic Statistical Methods
341
