analysis, and consumer tests are conducted to determine if consumers perceive the change
in attributes and if such modiﬁcations improve the overall ratings.
The study of attribute changes, together with consumer scores, enables the company to
identify and understand those attributes and/or ingredients or process variables that
drive overall acceptance in the market.
12.1.3
Development of New Products
During the typical new product development cycle, affective tests are needed at several
critical junctures, e.g., focus groups to evaluate a concept or a prototype; feasibility studies
in which the test product is presented to consumers, allowing them to see and touch it;
central location tests during product development to conﬁrm that the product charac-
teristics do offer the expected advantage over the competition; controlled comparisons
with the competition during test marketing; renewed comparisons during the reduction-
to-practice stage to conﬁrm that the desired characteristics survive into large-scale pro-
duction; and ﬁnally, central location and home use tests during the growth phase to
determine the degree of success enjoyed by the competition as it tries to catch up.
Depending on test results at each stage, and the ability of R&D to reformulate or scale up
at each step, the new product development cycle can take from a few months to a few
years. This process requires the use of several types of affective tests designed to measure,
e.g., responses to the ﬁrst concepts, chosen concepts vs. prototypes, different prototypes,
and competition vs. prototypes. At any given time during the development process, the
test objective may resemble those of a product maintenance project, e.g., a pilot plant scale-
up, or an optimization project, as described above. Rapid prototype development is used
when the time to market is short and there is an urgency to make a product decision. This
approach utilizes ongoing frequent contact with the target consumer population to collect
immediate feedback. The feedback is provided to product development to make rapid
changes that are then submitted to the target audience for further feedback. Test methods
utilized with this approach include small scale CLT’s or qualitative research.
12.1.4
Assessment of Market Potential
Typically, the assessment of market potential is a function of the marketing department
that in turn will consult with the sensory evaluation department about aspects of the
questionnaire design (such as key attributes that describe differences among products),
the method of testing, and data previously collected by sensory evaluation. Questions
about intent to purchase; purchase price; current purchase habits; consumer food habits
(Barker 1982; Meiselman 1984); and the effects of packaging, advertising, and convenience
are critical for the acceptance of branded products. The sensory analyst’s primary function
is to guide research and development. Whether the sensory analyst should also include
market-oriented questions in consumer testing is a function of the structure of the
individual company, the ability of the marketing department to provide such data, and
the ability of the sensory analyst to assume responsibility for assessing market conditions.
12.1.5
Category Review
When a company wishes to study a product category for the purpose of understanding
the position of its brand within the competitive set or for the purpose of identifying
areas within a product category where opportunities may exist, a category review is
recommended (Lawless and Heymann 1998:605). Descriptive analysis of the broadest
array of products and/or prototypes that deﬁnes or covers the category yields
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
258
