The direction of the axis deﬁned by each principal component, yi, is expressed as a linear
combination of the observed variables, xj, as in:
yi Z ai1x1 Cai2x2 C. Caipxp
(14.1)
The coefﬁcients, aij, are called weights or loading factors. They measure the importance of
the original variables on each principal component. Like correlation coefﬁcients, aij takes
on values between K1 and C1. Avalue close to K1 or C1 indicates that the corresponding
variable has a large inﬂuence on the value of the principal component; values close to zero
indicate that the corresponding variable has little inﬂuence on the principal component.
Typically, groups of highly correlated observed variables segregate themselves into non-
overlapping groups predominantly associated with a speciﬁc principal component.
Examination of the loading factors reveals how the observed variables group together
and may lead to a meaningful interpretation of the type of variability being summarized
by each principal component. To further aid in interpretation, the principal component
axes are sometimes rotated to increase their alignment with the axes of the original vari-
ables. After rotation the ﬁrst principal component will no longer lie in the direction of
maximum variability, followed by the second, etc., but the advantage gained by having a
small number of interpretable latent variables offsets this effect.
In addition to depicting the associations among the original variables, PCA can be used
to display the relative “locations” of the samples. A plot of the principal component scores
for a set of products can reveal groupings and polarizations of the samples that would not
be as readily apparent in an examination of the larger number of original variables.
Cooper, Earle, and Triggs (1989) used PCA to depict in two dimensions the relationship
of 16 orange juice products originally evaluated on ten attributes (see Figure 14.4). In their
analysis, the ﬁrst two principal components explained 79% of the original variability.
Piggott and Sharman (1986) present additional examples. Powers (1988) presents numer-
ous references of the application of PCA in descriptive analysis.
PCA provides a way to summarize data collected on a large number of variables in fewer
dimensions. It is tempting to ask if it is necessary to continue to evaluate all of the original
variables as opposed to only a few “representative” ones. The number of original variables
studied should not be reduced based on PCA results. As seen in Equation 14.1, each of
1
10
0
Eigenvalue
2
3
4
Principal component number
5
6
7
8
9
FIGURE 14.3
A scree plot of the variability explained by each principal component used to determine how many principal
components should be retained in a study. Only those principal components that are extracted before the plot
ﬂattens out are retained.
Advanced Statistical Methods
361
