12.4.2
Applications
Research at the fuzzy front end allows the:
† Exploration of consumers as purchasers of products with speciﬁc features or
sensory properties identiﬁed
† Study of product functionality and ergonomics
† Determination of how a consumer is modifying a product or adapting usage to
suit his/her needs
† Uncovering of attitudes, behaviors, and motivators within the culture
† Study of the consumers in their own environment through observational
research
12.4.3
Tools and Techniques
There are many methods or techniques that can be used to uncover consumer’s thoughts
and ideas leading to new product ideas and beyond. The most often-used techniques are
qualitative in nature and occur in the ﬁeld; however, quantitative approaches are also
effective. Consumers may be studied in context in their homes, on the street, in stores,
or at point of purchase—when and where dollars are spent. Going to the ﬁeld and observ-
ing consumers is often referred to as ethnography or immersion. When immersing oneself
into the consumer’s environment, information is gathered through observation and
dialogue. Beyond the traditional techniques used to elicit information from consumers
in focus groups or one-on-one interviews, information-gathering approaches that are used
in support of the fuzzy front end are often imagery-based and include, but are not limited
to, compare and contrast, mind maps, word webs, and collages. Quantitative techniques
that go beyond CLT’s or HUT’s to consider include online research and intrinsic/extrinsic
studies. The online research provides early exploration into the design of concepts, atti-
tudes, and behavioral research. Intrinsic/extrinsic research studies the essential aspects of
a product along with the external motivators. See Section 12.7 for a detailed discussion of
the use of Internet research at the fuzzy front end.
As stated before, when studying consumers in context through observation, a deeper
understanding is possible. This world approach helps to uncover actual behaviors. When
conducting research of this type, there are two different paths that can be taken to capture
the information. One approach has the researcher being a participant observer who
watches without conversation with the consumer. The other approach has the researcher
being an observational interviewer, who actively interacts with the consumer, probing
in-depth on areas of interest. Two examples of observational research:
Example 12.1: Going into a home to observe a primary care giver making lunch for
their children, the observer studies what ingredients are used (bread, meat, condi-
ments, and cheese), where the ingredients are stored (pantry and refrigerator),
and how the sandwich is assembled (number of steps) and served. Multiple home
visits would uncover differences in preferences, as well as needs and behaviors.
Example 12.2: Watching and interviewing different women aged 18–21, 30–35, and
60–65 selecting and purchasing lipstick, gloss, or foundation would demonstrate
different preferences based on age, lifestyle, and skin type. Further information
related to the product use, what questions are asked, and what colors are
selected, is uncovered.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
266
