9.5
Panel Performance and Motivation
Any good measuring tool needs to be checked regularly to determine its ability to perform
validly and consistently. In the case of a sensory panel, the individuals, as well as the panel
as a whole, need to be monitored. Panels are comprised of human subjects who have other
jobs and responsibilities in addition to their participation in the sensory program; it is
necessary to ﬁnd ways to maintain the panelists’ interest and motivation over long periods
of product testing.
9.5.1
Performance
For both difference and descriptive panels, the sensory analyst needs to have a
measure of the performance of each panelist and of the panel, in terms of validity
and reproducibility. Validity is the correctness of the response. In certain difference
tests, such as the triangle and duo-trio, and in some directional attribute tests, the
analyst knows the correct answer (the odd sample, the coded reference, the sweeter
sample) and can assess the number of correct responses over time. The percent of
correct responses can be computed for each panelist on a regular monthly or bimonthly
basis. Weighted scores can also be calculated, based on the difﬁculty of each test in
which the panelist participated (Aust 1984). For the panel as a whole, validity can be
measured by comparing panel results to other sensory test data, instrumental data, or
the known variation in the stimulus, such as increased heat treatment, addition of a
chemical, etc.
Reliability, or the ability to reproduce results, can be easily assessed for the individual
panelists and for the panel as a whole by replicating the test, using duplicate test samples,
or using blind controls.
For descriptive data that are analyzed statistically by the analysis of variance, the pane-
lists’ performance can be assessed across each attribute as part of the data analysis (see
ASTM (1981), or Lea, Næs, and Rødbottenm (1997) for a detailed description of this
analysis applied to a set of QDA results). It is recognized and accepted in QDA that
panelists will use different parts of the scale to express their perceptions of the same
sample. It is the relative differences in their ratings and not their absolute values that
are considered important. In other descriptive methods, such as Spectrum, panelists are
calibrated through the use of references to use the same part of the scale when evaluating
the same sample. A descriptive panel of this type is equivalent to an analytical instrument
that requires regular calibration checks. Several approaches, in addition to the ASTM
guideline just mentioned, are appropriate for monitoring the individual and combined
performance of “calibrated” panelists. Two aspects of performance that require moni-
toring are the panel’s accuracy (bias) and its precision (variability). See also Nielsen,
Hyldig, and Sørensen (2005).
Bias. To assess a panelist’s ability to be “on target,” the panel leader can determine
the panelist’s ability to match the accepted intensity of the attributes of a control or
reference. The statistical measure of difference from the target or control rating, called
bias, is deﬁned as:
panelist bias; d Z xKm;
(9.1)
where d is the deviation or bias, x is the observed panelist value, and m is the value for the
control or target attribute.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 9
154
