procedures, such as stepwise regression. However, the regression model that results
from a stepwise procedure does not tell the whole story when it comes to identifying all
of the predictor variables, x values, that are related to the predicted variable, y. For
example, when using attribute intensity data from a descriptive panel to predict
consumer acceptance, a particular attribute, such as sweet taste, may be highly
related to acceptance, but it may not appear in the regression model because another
attribute which is highly correlated with sweet taste, such as sweet aftertaste, may
already be in the model. The stepwise procedure will not include both sweet taste
and sweet aftertaste in the regression model precisely because they are highly corre-
lated with each other (and, thus, are explaining the same variability in acceptance). This
gives the researcher the incorrect impression that only sweet aftertaste, and not sweet
taste, is important to acceptance. A more correct interpretation is that the term in the
regression model, e.g., sweet aftertaste, is, in effect, representing all of the descriptive
attributes with which it is highly correlated. However, the regression model does not
reveal which attributes are correlated. Thus, a stepwise regression procedure applied to
correlated predictor variables does not, by itself, uncover all of the attributes that are
“driving” acceptance.
Principal components regression (PCR) is a method that overcomes this weakness. PCR
is a straightforward combination of PCA and regression. Continuing the example of using
descriptive data to predict acceptance, a PCA is performed on the average attribute
proﬁles of the samples in the study. A set of factor scores is obtained for each sample.
The factor scores are used as the predictor variables, i.e., the x values, in a regression
analysis to predict consumer acceptance, y. The factors obtained from the PCA represent
the underlying dimensions of sensory variability in the samples and are typically easy to
interpret based on the factor loadings. Attributes with large positive or negative loadings
(i.e., close to C1 or K1) on a single factor are the attributes that deﬁne the factor, so if the
factor is found to be a signiﬁcant driver of acceptance, the researcher knows that all of the
attributes associated with that factor are, as a group, inﬂuencing acceptance. In addition,
the factors obtained from PCA are not correlated with each other. Thus, the problem of
multicolinearity is avoided. Popper, Heymann, and Rossi (1997) present an excellent
example of PCR applied to the prediction of consumer acceptance of twelve honey-
mustard salad dressings based on their descriptive proﬁles.
The factors identiﬁed with PCA are ordered according to how much of the variability
in the original data each explains. The ﬁrst factor accounts for the greatest amount of
variability, the second factor accounts for the next greatest amount, etc. It may not be
the case that the factor that explains the most variability in the original x variables is
the factor that is most highly related to y. In fact, some factors may not be related to y at
all and, therefore, do not need to be included in the PCR model. Stepwise regression
can be used to generate a PCR model that includes only those factors which are
statistically signiﬁcant predictors of y. In the descriptive analysis example, the stepwise
approach to PCR allows the researcher to identify which underlying dimensions of
sensory variability (and all of their associated attributes) “drive” acceptance and
which do not.
The PCR approach can be further extended by recognizing that the factor scores may be
related to the response variable, y, in nonlinear and interactive ways. Nonlinear and
interactive relationships can be accounted for in PCR by including the squares and the
cross-products of the factor scores, respectively, as variables in the regression, as is done in
response surface methodology (see Section 14.3.3). This allows the researcher to identify
the levels of the factor scores that are associated with, for example, the best liked
product—i.e., an optimum or “ideal” point.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
372
