The calculation of d0 from full category scale data is too complicated to explain here.
However, ASTM (2003) presents a rapid, table look-up approach that applies the tech-
nique used for the “A”–“not A” test to category-scale data that has been collapsed into two
categories (irrespective of how many categories there were on the physical scale used to
collect the data). Detail is lost due to the collapsing but the values of d0 and its variance are
still accurate.
13.5
The Statistical Design of Sensory Panel Studies
In this section, experimental designs that are commonly used in sensory evaluation are
presented. The discussion is structured to avoid much of the confusion that often
surrounds this topic. In Section 13.5.1, independent replications of an experiment are
distinguished from multiple observations of a single sample. It is shown that confusing
replications with multiple observations, which results directly from failing to recognize
the population of interest, can lead to the incorrect use of measurement error in place of
experimental error in the statistical analysis of sensory data. When this occurs, samples are
often declared to be signiﬁcantly different when they are not. In Section 13.5.2, the most
commonly used designs for sensory panel studies are presented. These include random-
ized (complete) block designs, balanced incomplete block designs, Latin-square designs,
and split-plot designs.
13.5.1
Sampling: Replication vs. Multiple Observations
The fundamental intent of the statistical analysis of a designed experiment is to
generate an accurate and precise estimate of the experimental error. All tests of
hypotheses and conﬁdence statements are based on this. Experimental error is the
unexplainable, natural variability of the population being studied. Experimental error
is expressed quantitatively as the variance or as the standard deviation of the popu-
lation. One measurement taken on one unit from a population provides no means for
estimating experimental error. In fact, multiple observations of the same unit provide
no means to estimate experimental error, either. The differences among the multiple
observations taken on a single unit result from measurement error. Several units from
the same population need to be sampled to develop a valid estimate of experimental
error. The measurements taken on different units are called replications. It is the unit-
to-unit (or “rep-to-rep”) differences that contain the information about the variability of
the population (i.e., experimental error).
A common objective of sensory studies is to differentiate products based on
differences in the perceived intensities of some attributes. If only a single sample
(batch, jar, preparation, etc.) of each product is evaluated, there is no way to estimate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
c1
c2 c3
c4
c5
c6
c7
c8
FIGURE 13.13
Multiple c criteria form the boundaries of
the scale categories. In order to receive a
rating of 5, the perceived intensity of a
sample must be greater than c4 but less
than c5.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 13
338
