values for the proportion of distinguishers (pd!0). This is a logical impossibility that
should not be used as the decision criterion in a test.
In using the Test Sensitivity Analyzer for two-sided directional difference tests,
researchers must remember to double the computed value for a-risk to account for the
two-sided nature of the test.
13.4
Thurstonian Scaling
Although the percent-distinguisher model is appealing for its ease of interpretation, it is
not a theoretical model of human behavior. It is useful for planning discrimination tests
but, in general, it over-simpliﬁes the behavior of sensory assessors. If individuals are truly
either distinguishers or nondistinguishers, then in replicate triangle tests involving the
same two samples, for example, one group of assessors should have 100% correct
responses (the distinguishers) and another group should have 1/3 correct responses
(the nondistinguishers). This is not what happens in practice. A more elaborate model
of human behavior is necessary to better understand the results observed in discrimi-
nation tests. Thurstonian scaling (Thurstone 1927) is one such model. The following
overview of Thurstonian scaling is drawn largely from Ennis (2001) that was later rep-
resented in ASTM (2003).
13.4.1
A Fundamental Measure of Sensory Differences
The Thurstonian model is based on two assumptions. The ﬁrst assumption is that percep-
tions have a probabilistic component that follows a normal probability rule. The second
assumption is that assessors can faithfully execute the decision rule associated with the
sensory task they are asked to perform.
The Thurstonian model recognizes that perceptions vary when an assessor performs
repeated evaluations of the same product. The variations may result from heterogeneity in
the product or from momentary physiological or psychological changes in the assessor, or
some combination of these. Regardless of the sources, perceptions vary from one evalu-
ation to another. The Thurstonian model assumes that the changes in perception follow a
normal probability distribution on a nonspeciﬁc dimension of sensory magnitude.
Without loss of generality, the simplest Thurstonian model assumes that the distribution
of perceptions fall about the sample’s average magnitude with a standard deviation of one
(see Figure 13.10).
Probability
Below average
Above average
Average
Sensory magnitude
FIGURE 13.10
Normal distribution of sensory perceptions. An assessor’s perceptions vary about the average of the product
according to a normal probability distribution.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 13
334
