or a combination of both cases may exist. Regardless, multiple regression analysis is a
straight-forward extension of simple linear regression that allows multiple independent
variables to be included in the regression equation for y. An integral part of the analysis
involves the assessment of the value of each term considered for inclusion in the model.
A pitfall associated with multiple regression is that now any relationships that exist
among the independent variables will inﬂuence the resulting regression equation. Multi-
colinearity is the term used to describe situations in which two or more independent
variables are highly correlated with each other. This mutual correlation will inﬂuence
the values of the estimated coefﬁcients, bi’s, and could lead to incorrect conclusions
about the importance of each term in the model. It is important that the correlation
structure of the independent variables be studied before undertaking a multiple linear
regression analysis. The correlation analysis will be more meaningful if it is accompanied
by a scatterplot matrix of the independent (and dependent) variables, like the one in
Figure 14.2. A designed approach to multiple regression, called response surface methodology
(RSM), avoids the problems of multicolinearity. RSM will be discussed in Section 14.3.
Not all of the independent variables that could be included in a multiple linear
regression model may be needed. Some of the independent variables may be poor predic-
tors of the response, or due to multicolinearity, two or more independent variables may
explain the same variability in the dependent variable. Several approaches for selecting
variables to include in the model are available (see Draper and Smith 1981). Most
computer packages include more than one.
One “brute force” approach is the “all possible regressions” method. As the name
implies, all possible subsets of the independent variables are considered, starting with
all of the one-variable models, then all of the possible two-variable models, etc. Computer
output typically only presents a small number of the best models from each size group.
Several criteria are used to determine which models are best in all possible regressions.
The multiple R2 (from Equation 14.7) is a common measure, with larger values being
preferred. Another criterion is the size of the residual mean square, MSRes, from the
ANOVA. MSRes is the estimated residual variance, so smaller values are desirable.
Associated with the residual mean square criteria is the adjusted R2, where
R2
adj Z 1KðnK1ÞMSRes
SSTot
:
(14.10)
R2
adj is interpreted in the same way as R2. In multiple regression, the residual mean
square will initially decrease with the addition of new terms into the model; R2 will
increase. Some studies reach a point where the further additions of new terms will
result in an increase in the residual mean square (a bad sign), but R2 will continue to
increase (a good sign). When the residual mean square begins to increase, the adjusted R2
will begin to decrease so that the two statistics agree qualitatively.
A ﬁnal criterion commonly used in all possible regressions is Mallow’s Cp statistic
(1973):
Cp Z SSResðpÞ
MSFull
C2pKn
(14.11)
where SSRes(p) is the residual sum of squares from a model containing p terms and MSFull is
the residual mean square from the model containing all of the independent variables.
Unlike R2 and MSRes, Cp considers how good the full model is and uses this as a base of
comparison to gauge the quality of a model containing only a subset of the independent
variables. One drawback to Cp is that it can only be calculated when the number of
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
370
