Interpretation: The analyst concludes that, even in the presence of variability among the
control samples, the test sample is signiﬁcantly different from the average of the controls.
He suggests, as a next step, to determine with consumers whether the test batch is different
in preference or acceptance. Such determination allows the company to determine the degree
to which the difference perceived by the panel is meaningful to consumers. Further study
with the difference-from-control test paired with consumer tests permits the establishment
of realistic speciﬁcations for QA.
6.9
Sequential Tests
6.9.1
Scope and Application
Sequential tests are a means to economize the number of evaluations required to draw a
conclusion, for example, acceptance vs. rejection of a trainee on a panel or shipment vs.
destruction of a lot of produced goods. Unlike the preceding tests in this chapter, where
the size of the type-II error (b) is minimized for a ﬁxed a and number of judgments, n, in
sequential tests the values of a and b are decided upon beforehand, and n is determined by
evaluating the outcome of each sensory evaluation as it occurs. Also, because a and b are
determined beforehand, sequential tests provide a direct approach to simultaneously test
for either the difference or the similarity (see Section 6.2) between the two samples.
Sequential tests are very practical and efﬁcient because they take into consideration the
possibility that the evidence derived from the ﬁrst few evaluations may be quite sufﬁcient
(for ﬁxed values of a and b) to draw a conclusion. Any further testing would be a waste of
time and money. In fact, sequential tests can reduce the number of evaluations required by
as much as 50%.
The sequential approach may be used with those existence-of-difference tests in
which there is a correct and an incorrect answer, e.g., the triangle, two-out-of-ﬁve, and
duo–trio tests.
6.9.2
Principle of the Test
Conduct a sequence of evaluations according to the procedure appropriate for the
chosen method and enter the results of each completed test into a graph, such as
Figure 6.20, in which three regions are identiﬁed: the acceptance region, the rejection
region, and the continue-testing region. In Figure 6.20, the number of trials is plotted on
the horizontal (x) axis and the total number of correct responses is plotted on the
vertical (y) axis. Enter the result of the ﬁrst test, if correct, as (x,y)Z(1,1) and if incorrect,
as (x,y)Z(1,0). For each succeeding test, increase x by 1, and increase y by 1 for a correct
reply and by 0 for an incorrect reply. Continue testing until a point touches or crosses
one of the lines bordering the region of indecision. The indicated conclusion (i.e., accept
or reject) is then drawn.
6.9.3
Analysis and Interpretation of Results: Parameters of the Test
The version of the sequential test used here is that of the ISO (2004b). The test itself is due
to Wald (1947), and an alternative test is presented by Rao (1950). Both tests are clearly
explained by Bradley (1953), who gives methods for calculating the expected number of
evaluations needed to reach a decision, as well as rules for choosing the parameters
associated with the method, as shown in Example 6.14 and Example 6.15.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 6
100
