Chapter 7, pp. 105–128). Marketing wishes to conﬁrm that the prototype is indeed
preferred to the current product that is enjoying large volume sales.
Test objective. To determine whether the prototype is preferred over the current product.
Test design. This test is one-sided as the prototype was developed to be more
peanutty in response to consumer requests. A group of 100 subjects, prescreened as
users of peanut butter, are selected and invited to a central location site where they
receive the two samples in simultaneous presentation, half in the order A–B, the other
half B–A. All samples are coded with three-digit random numbers. Subjects are
encouraged
to
make
a
choice
(see
discussion
of forced
choice,
Chapter
7,
Section 2.2). The scoresheet is shown in Figure 12.1. The null hypothesis is H0: the
preference for the higher-peanut ﬂavor prototype is %50%. The alternative hypothesis
is Ha: the preference for the prototype is O50%.
Screen samples. Samples used are those already subjected to the attribute difference test
described earlier, in which a higher level of peanut ﬂavor was conﬁrmed.
Conduct test. The method described in Chapter 7, Section 2.4, was used; 62 subjects
preferred the prototype. It is concluded from Table 17.8 that a signiﬁcant preference
exists for the prototype over the current product.
Interpret results. The new product can be marketed in place of the current with a label
stating: “More Peanut Flavor.”
12.6.3.2
Acceptance Tests
When a product researcher needs to determine the “affective status” of a product, i.e., how
well it is liked by consumers, an acceptance test is the correct choice. The product is
compared to a well-liked company product or that of a competitor, and a hedonic scale,
such as those shown in Figure 12.2, is used to indicate degrees of unacceptable to accep-
table, or dislike to like. The two lower scales, “KIDS” and “Snoopy,” are commonly used
with children of grade-school age.
Instructions
1.
Taste the product on the left first, and the product on the right second.
Now that you've tasted both products, which one do you prefer? Please
choose one:
463
189
2.
Please comment on the reasons for your choice:
Name
Date
Peanut Butter
FIGURE 12.1
Score sheet for paired preference test for Example 12.1: improved peanut butter.
Affective Tests: Affective Methods: Quantitative
275
