Panelists begin to develop their list of best descriptors by ﬁrst evaluating a broad
array of products (commercial brands, competitors, pilot plant runs, etc.) that deﬁne the
product category. After some initial experience with the category, each panelist
produces a list of terms to describe the set. Additional terms and references may be
taken from the literature, e.g., from published ﬂavor lexicons (Johnsen et al. 1988;
Civille and Lyon 1996). The terms are then compiled or organized into a list that is
comprehensive, yet not overlapping. This process includes using references (see
Appendix 11.2) to determine the best choice for a term and to best deﬁne that term
so that it is understood in the same way by all panelists.
An example of the adaptation of existing underlying terms to a speciﬁc product
category is the work on noodles by Janto et al. (1998). Several standard terms apply to
noodles, but the vast Asian noodle frame of reference called for additional terms, such as
“starch between teeth” and “slipperiness between lips.”
11.4
Intensity
Different project objectives may require widely different intensity scales. A key property of
a scale is the number of points of discrimination along the scale. If product differences
require a large number of points of discrimination to clearly deﬁne intensity differences
both within and between attributes, the panel leader requires a 15-cm scale, or a category
with 30 points or more, or an ME scale.
The Spectrum method is based on extensive use of reference points that may be
chosen according to the guidelines given in Appendix 11.2. These are derived from
the collective data of several panels over several replicates. Whatever the scale chosen,
it must have at least two and preferably three to ﬁve reference points distributed across
the range. A set of well-chosen reference points greatly reduces panel variability,
allowing for a comparison of data across time and products. Such data also allow
more precise correlation with stimulus changes (stimulus/response curve) and with
instrumental data (sensory/instrumental correlations). The choice of scaling technique
may also depend on the available facilities for computer manipulation of data and on
the need for sophisticated data analysis. The most common application of the Spectrum
scale is the use of 0–15 points (measured in tenths, yielding 150 points of discrimi-
nation) for most foods and consumer products. The panelists write (or enter) the actual
number for the intensity of each attribute. Occasionally, with ingredients and condi-
ments, the panel uses numbers higher than 15 to express the increased strength.
Examples are the sourness of pure lemon juice (30) and the sweetness of pure corn
syrup (24).
11.5
Other Options
The tools of the Spectrum method include time/intensity tests, the difference-from-control
test, total ﬂavor impact assessment, and others. The basic philosophy, as mentioned, is to
train the panel to fully deﬁne each and all of a product’s attributes, to rate the intensity of
each, and to include other relevant characterizing aspects such as changes over time,
differences in order of appearance of attributes, and integrated total aroma and/or
ﬂavor impact.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 11
192
