TABLE 15.4
Area of Application of Affective Tests Used in Consumer Research and Employee Acceptance Tests
Test
Questions Typically Asked Qualitative Tests
Areas of Application
A. Focus groups/panels
1. Focus groups/panels
What are some words, behaviors or opinions associated with these concepts
or products?
Focus groups
2. Small groups/diads/triads
What are your opinions and behaviors around this personal product use?
Small groups/diads/triads
B. Fuzzy front end research
1. Observational
How do consumes behave in the store or at home when encountering my
product?
Point-of-purchase interviews, observation journals, videos
2. Ethnography
How do consumers respond at a deep level to products or concepts?
Collages, sequence maps, journals
Quantitative tests
A. Preference tests
1. Paired preference
Which sample do you prefer? Which sample do you like better?
Comparison of two products
2. Rank preference
Rank samples according to your preference with 1Z best, 2Z next best, etc.
Comparison of 3–6 products
3. Multiple paired preference
As number 1
Comparison of 3–6 products
4. Multiple paired preference, selected pairs
As number 1
Comparison of 5–8 products
B. Acceptance tests
1. Simple acceptance test
Is the sample acceptable/not acceptable?
First screening in employee acceptance test
2. Hedonic rating
Chapter 12, Figure 12.2 and Figure 12.3
One or more products to study how acceptance is
distributed in the population represented by the
subjects
C. Attribute diagnostics
1. Attribute-by-preference test
Which sample did you prefer for fragrance?
Comparison of two to six products to determine which
attributes “drive” preference
2. Hedonic rating of individual attributes
Rate the following attributes on the hedonic scale provided
Study of one or more products to determine which
attributes, and at what level, “drive” preference
3. Intensity rating of individual attributes
Rate the following attributes on the intensity scale provided, comparing
with your ideal rating
Study of one or more products, in cases where groups of
subjects differ in their preference
Affective tests can be divided into qualitative and quantitative affective methods. Qualitative methods include techniques such as focus groups and one-on-one (in depth)
interviews that are designed to collect information from consumers in groups or individually. Trained moderators, facilitators and/or product developers seeking guidance
about consumer vocabulary, attitudes, or behavior interpret the output in the form of transcripts and videos. Quantitative affective tests can be divided into preference tests, in
which the task is to arrange the products tested in order of preference, acceptance tests, in which the task is to rate the product or products on a scale of acceptability, and
“attribute diagnostics,” in which the task is to rank or rate the principal attributes that determine a product’s preference or acceptance. With regard to the statistical analysis,
preference and acceptance tests can be seen as a special case of attribute difference tests (Table 15.3), in which the attribute of interest is either preference or degree of acceptance.
In theory, all tests listed in Table 15.3 can be used as preference tests and/or as acceptance tests. In practice, subjects in affective tests are less experienced, and complex designs
such as balanced incomplete blocks are not usable. The tests in this table are equally suitable for presentation in laboratory tests, employee acceptance tests, central location
consumer tests, or home-use consumer tests, unless otherwise indicated.
Guidelines for Choice of Technique
411
