Panel Room
† No refreshments are allowed in the panel room.
† Smoking is prohibited.
† Panel areas must be cleaned up after each session.
† All magazines and newspapers are to be stored after use.
Panel Cancellation
† During inclement weather a decision will be made as soon as possible and the
panel leader will contact the panelists about cancellation.
† Winter weather cancellations usually follow the local school policy. If the roads
are clear for the schools to open and panel is scheduled, panel will take place
unless the panel leader decides differently. The panel leader will start the call
chain notifying panelists of the change.
† Call chain is used to notify panelists of changes in the schedule.
† Panel leader starts chain and calls person on list.
† That person then calls the next person on the list.
† If there is no live person on the phone, leave a message and continue on the list
until you reach a person.
† The process continues until the last person calls the panel leader to indicate that
the chain is complete.
† The list is updated as necessary. Panelists should alert the panel leader to any
phone number and address changes that occur during the year.
Emergency Calls
† If you cannot make a scheduled panel session please call and leave
a message.
† There is an answering machine during nonbusiness hours.
† Please limit personal calls to the ofﬁce. The phone should be used for emer-
gency contacts only.
Outside Preparation
† For skinfeel panel:
† It is recommended panelists review pertinent protocols prior to a study and
practice sessions.
† Treat skin with care during the seasons. The weather may damage your skin
surfaces for evaluations.
† Do not apply lotions or creams on the skin surfaces the day of evaluation prior
to panel. This also includes items with strong lingering fragrances such as
shampoos, hair sprays, perfumes, etc.
† Use rubber gloves when working with detergents and dish washing.
† Use gloves when gardening to protect from calluses and blisters.
† Use sunscreen when outside to prevent sunburn.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 9
170
