For a detailed review of the history and an evaluation of current practices of odor
measurement, the reader is referred to Doty and Laing (2003).
Experience shows that with practice and training (Brown et al. 1978), it is possible to
obtain reproducibility levels of G20% for a given panel and G50% between one large
panel (O25) and another. The important factors, in addition to repeated training with the
actual substance under test, are those described in Chapter 4: subjects will pride them-
selves and hope to please the experimenter by ﬁnding the lowest threshold, and this must
be counteracted by meticulous attention to the details of sample preparation and sample
presentation so as to not leave clues to their identity.
8.2
Deﬁnitions
Thresholds are the limits of sensory capacities. It is convenient to distinguish between the
absolute threshold, the recognition threshold, the difference threshold, and the
terminal threshold.
The absolute threshold (detection threshold) is the lowest stimulus capable of produ-
cing a sensation: the dimmest light, the softest sound, the lightest weight, the
weakest taste. The recognition threshold is the level of a stimulus at which the speciﬁc
stimulus can be recognized and identiﬁed. The recognition threshold is usually higher
than the absolute threshold. If a person tastes water containing increasing levels of added
sucrose a transition in sensation will occur in at some point from “water taste or pure
water” to “a very mild taste.” As the concentration of sucrose increases, a further transi-
tion will occur from “a very mild taste” to “mild sweet.” The level at which this second
transition occurs is called the recognition threshold.
The difference threshold is the extent of change in the stimulus necessary to produce a
noticeable difference. It is usually determined by presenting a standard stimulus that is
then compared to a variable stimulus. The term just noticeable difference (JND) is used when
the difference threshold is determined by changing the variable stimulus by small
amounts above and below the standard until the subject notices a difference. Chapter 5
addresses this subject directly.
The terminal threshold is that magnitude of a stimulus above which there is no increase
in the perceived intensity of the appropriate quality for that stimulus. Above this level,
pain often occurs.
JNDs increase as one proceeds up the scale of concentration, and they have been used
as scale steps of sensory intensity. Hainer et al. (1954) calculated that their subjects
could distinguish some 29 JNDs between the absolute and the terminal thresholds.
However, thresholds vary too much from person to person, and from group to
group, for the JND to have gained practical application as a measure of perceived
intensity.
The conventional notion of a threshold (e.g., for diesel exhaust in air) is that shown in
Figure 8.1. Above 5 ppm, the exhaust can be detected; below 5 ppm it cannot be
detected. However, an observer making repeated tests using a dilution olfactometer
will produce a set of results such as those shown in Figure 8.2. The observer’s sensitivity
will vary with chance air currents over the olfactory membrane and with momentary or
biorhythmic variations in the sensitivity of his nervous system. The ticking of a watch
held at a certain distance can be heard one moment can be inaudible the next, and then
audible again, etc. The threshold is not a ﬁxed point, but a value on a stimulus conti-
nuum. By convention, the observer’s personal threshold is that concentration that can be
detected 50% of the time and not the concentration that can be detected at X%
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 8
130
