subtle but meaningful differences among the cheese pizzas. More in-depth information
about the attributes that drive liking may be obtained if the pepperoni pizza is eliminated
and the category of interest is redeﬁned to be plain cheese pizza. If only one attribute is
involved, another option is to eliminate the attribute, especially if prior research has
shown that it does not play a signiﬁcant role in acceptance. Alternatively, the preference
mapping study could be conducted twice. The ﬁrst run would include all of the products
with special interest paid to the effect of the pepperoni-related attributes. The second run
would consist of only the plain cheese pizza product to focus more speciﬁcally on the
attributes that drive liking in that group.
The same consideration should be paid to the possible elimination of attributes. If the
intensity of an attribute is the same for all of the products in the test, or if the intensity
varies over a trivially small range of values (e.g., range%0.5 units on a 15-point scale), the
attribute should be dropped from the analysis. Similarly, if the intensity of an attribute is
subthreshold for all of products, the attribute should be dropped. This is especially
important if the PCA is conducted using the correlation matrix as opposed to the covari-
ance matrix of the responses. Large but spurious correlations can occur with attributes that
exhibit only a small range of values. A correlation-based PCA cannot distinguish between
attributes with trivial ranges of intensities and those with meaningfully large ranges when
it computes loading factors and factor scores. Attributes with trivially small ranges may
appear to play key roles in deﬁning the perceptual space of the products. By itself, this
point seems to support the use of the covariance matrix in the PCA because the use of the
covariance matrix down-weights attributes that exhibit little variability. However, it is
widely recognized that small differences in certain attributes (e.g., off-notes) can have
large impacts on acceptance. A covariance-based PCA could down-weight these attributes
to the point that their true importance to acceptance is lost. Using the correlation matrix
after eliminating attributes with trivially small ranges of intensities preserves the import-
ance of these attributes. Because of this, correlation-based PCA are recommended for the
perceptual mapping step of an external preference mapping analysis.
Products
Sensory
Consumer
Profiles
Perceptual map
from PCA
Preference map linking
acceptance to sensory
by regression
Acceptance
Consumer segments
from cluster analysis
FIGURE 14.13
Schematic diagram of an external preference mapping analysis. Products are submitted for both sensory descrip-
tive and consumer evaluations. Sensory results are summarized on a perceptual map. Consumer acceptance
ratings are submitted to a cluster analysis to identify preference segments. The sensory and consumer infor-
mation are linked using regression analysis.
Advanced Statistical Methods
381
