10.4.3
The Quantitative Descriptive Analysis (QDAw) Method
In response to dissatisfaction among sensory analysts with the lack of statistical treatment
of data obtained with the Flavor Proﬁle or related methods, the Tragon Corp. developed
the QDAw method of descriptive analysis (Stone et al. 1974; Stone and Sidel 1992). This
method heavily relies on statistical analysis to determine the appropriate terms,
procedures, and panelists to be used for analysis of a speciﬁc product.
Panelists are selected from a large pool of candidates according to their ability to
discriminate differences in sensory properties among samples of the speciﬁc product
type for which they are to be trained. The training of QDA panels requires the use of
product and ingredient references, as with other descriptive methods, to stimulate the
generation of terminology. The panel leader acts as a facilitator, rather than as an
instructor, and refrains from inﬂuencing the group. Attention is given to development
of consistent terminology, but panelists are free to develop their own approach to scoring,
using the 15-cm (6 in.) line scale that the method provides.
QDA panelists evaluate products one at a time in separate booths to reduce distrac-
tion and panelist interaction. Panelists enter the data into a computer, or the scoresheets
are individually collected from the panelists as they are completed, and the data is
entered for computation usually with a digitizer or card reader directly from the scor-
esheets. Panelists do not discuss data, terminology, or samples after each taste session,
and they must depend on the discretion of the panel leader for any information on their
performance relative to other members of the panel and to any known differences
between samples.
The results of a QDA test are statistically analyzed, and the report generally contains a
graphic representation of the data in the form of a spider web with a branch or spoke from
a central point for each attribute.
The QDA method was developed in partial collaboration with the Department of Food
Science at the University of California at Davis. It represents a large step toward the ideal
of this book, the intelligent use of human subjects as measuring instruments, as discussed
in Chapter 1. In particular, the use of a graphic scale (visual analog scale) that reduces that
part of the bias in scaling, resulting from the use of numbers; the statistical treatment of the
data; the separation of panelists during evaluation; and the graphic approach to presen-
tation of data have done much to change the way that sensory scientists and their clients
view descriptive methodology. The following are areas that could beneﬁt from a change or
further development:
1. The panel, because of a lack of formal instruction, may develop erroneous terms.
For example, the difference between natural vanilla and pure vanillin should be
easily detected and described by a well-trained panel; however, an unguided
panel would choose the term vanilla to describe the ﬂavor of vanillin. Lack of
direction also may allow a senior panelist or stronger personality to dominate
the proceedings in all or part of the panel population in the development
of terminology.
2. The free approach to scaling can lead to inconsistency of results, partly because of
particular panelists’ evaluating a product on a given day and not on another, and
partly because of the context effects of one product seen after the other with no
external scale references.
3. The lack of immediate feedback to panelists on a regular basis reduces the opport-
unity for learning and expansion of terminology for greater capacity to
discriminate and describe differences.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 10
180
