responses. Although not entirely statistically proper (attributes are not randomly sampled
observations from some extant population), their approach is an interesting numerical
technique for studying data relationships and should not be overlooked.
There are two classes of cluster analysis algorithms: the hierarchical and the nonhier-
archical methods. The practical distinction between them is that after an observation is
assigned to a cluster by a hierarchical method, it can never be moved to another cluster,
whereas moving an observation from one cluster to another is possible in
nonhierarchical methods.
Hierarchical methods proceed in one of two directions. In the more common approach,
each observation is initially considered to be a cluster of size one and the analysis succes-
sively merges the observations (or intermediate clusters of observations) until only one
cluster exists. Alternatively, the analysis may begin by treating all the observations as
belonging to one cluster and then proceed to break groups of observations apart until
only single observations remain. The successive mergers or divisions are graphically
depicted in a dendrogram (or tree diagram) (see Figure 14.5). The dendrogram charts
the hierarchical structure of the observations, measures the degree of change in the clus-
tering criterion, and is used to decide how many clusters truly exist.
The general difference between hierarchical cluster analysis algorithms is the way in
which the distance (or linkage) between two clusters is measured. Commonly used algo-
rithms include average linkage, centroid linkage, median linkage, furthest neighbor (or
complete) linkage, nearest neighbor (or single) linkage, and Ward’s minimum variance
linkage (see SAS 1989). Ward’s method uses ANOVA-type sum of squares as a “distance”
measure. Each approach has its advantages and disadvantages. None has emerged as a
clear favorite for general use.
Nonhierarchical methods include the k-means method (MacQueen 1967) and the fuzzy
objective function (or FCV) method (Bezdek 1981). Iterative mathematical techniques are
used in both. For both, the user must indicate the number of clusters that are believed to
exist. In the k-means method, each observation is assigned to a cluster based on its
(Euclidean) distance from the center of the cluster. As more observations are added to a
cluster, the center moves; thus, the assignments of the observations must be repeated until
no furtherchangesoccur.FCVreplaces the concept of “cluster membership” with “degreeof
membership.” The method assigns a membership weight, between 0 and 1, to each
1
5
2
11
7
3
4
Observation
9
6
8
10
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
FIGURE 14.5
A dendrogram from a cluster analysis showing which observations are grouped together and the degree of
separation among the clusters.
Advanced Statistical Methods
363
