1. For each of the sensory properties under investigation (such as fragrance odor,
ﬂavor, oral texture, handfeel or skinfeel), the ability to detect differences in
characteristics present and in their intensities.
2. The ability to describe those characteristics using (a) verbal descriptors for the
characteristics and (b) scaling methods for the different levels of intensity.
3. The capacity for abstract reasoning, as descriptive analysis depends heavily
upon the use of references when characteristics must be quickly recalled and
applied to other products.
In addition to screening panelists for these descriptive capabilities, panel leaders must
prescreen candidates for the following personal criteria:
1. Interest in full participation in the rigors of the training, practice, and ongoing
work phases of a descriptive panel.
2. Availability to participate in 80% or more of all phases of the panel’s work;
whether conﬂict with home life, work load, travel, or even the candidate’s super-
visor may eventually cause the panelist to drop off the panel during or after
training, thus losing one panelist from an already small number of 10–15.
3. General good health and no illnesses related to the sensory properties being
measured, such as:
a. Diabetes, hypoglycemia, hypertension, dentures, chronic colds or sinusitis,
or food allergies in those candidates for ﬂavor and/or texture analysis of
foods, beverages, pharmaceuticals, or other products for internal use.
b. Chronic colds or sinusitis, for aroma analysis of foods, fragrances, beverages,
personal care products, pharmaceuticals, or household products.
c. Central nervous system disorders or reduced nerve sensitivity due to the use
of drugs affecting the central nervous system, for tactile analysis of personal
care skin products, fabrics, or household products.
The ability to detect and describe differences, the ability to apply abstract concepts, and
the degree of positive attitude and predilection for the tasks of descriptive analysis can all
be determined through a series of tests that include:
† A set of prescreening questionnaires.
† A set of acuity tests.
† A set of ranking/rating tests.
† A personal interview.
The investment in a descriptive panel is large in terms of time and human resources,
and it is wise to conduct an exhaustive screening process, rather than train
unqualiﬁed subjects.
Lists of screening criteria for three descriptive methods (the Flavor Proﬁle, Quantitative
Descriptive Analysis, and Texture Proﬁle) can be found in ASTM Special Technical Publi-
cation 758 (1981). The following criteria listed are those used to select subjects for training
in the spectrum Method of descriptive analysis, as described in Chapter 11. These can be
applied to the screening of employees, or for external screening in cases where recruiting
from the local community is preferred due to the amount of time necessary (20–50 h per
person per week). The additional prescreening questionnaires are used to select individ-
uals who can verbalize and think conceptually. This reduces the risk of selecting outside
Selection and Training of Panel Members: Descriptive Testing
149
