The distance between the points for segment 1 and segment 2 in Figure 14.21 indicate
different sensory attributes drive liking in the two segments. The sensory attributes that
fall close to the point plotted for each segment are positive drivers for that segment.
The attributes that fall on the opposite side of the map from the plotted point are
negative drivers. Inspection of Figure 14.22a and b reveals the differences in the key
drivers between the two segments. Segment 1 prefers products with lots of large and
ﬁrm meat, potato, and vegetable pieces and high intensities of meat identity, green herb,
carrot, onions, and celery ﬂavors and low intensity of nonnatural meat ﬂavor. Segment 2,
on the other hand, prefers lots of large ﬁrm potatoes in a clear, low viscosity sauce, high
meat-identity ﬂavor, low oiliness, and low spiciness (especially black pepper). These
ﬁndings agree strongly with the results from both the internal and external
preference maps.
In this way, the researcher can try different statistical methods to mine the data in an
effort to conﬁrm the results and look for any additional information about products
and consumers.
Using different statistical methods to mine the data allows researchers to cross-validate
the primary results of a study and to uncover additional information about both products
and consumers.
14.4
The Treatment Structure of an Experimental Design
In the experimental designs discussed in Chapter 13, the treatments (or products) were
viewed as a set of qualitatively distinct objects, having no particular association among
themselves. Such designs are said to have a one-way treatment structure. One-way
32
30
28
26
24
60
65
70
75
Moistness
% Respondent w/ R2>0.65 and predicted CA within 0.5 of maximum CA
sat05
< 0
>30
0–10
10–20
20–30
Crispness
FIGURE 14.20
Contour plot of percent of satisﬁed respondents (among respondents whose individual models had an R2O0.65).
Note multiple regions of high satisfaction at mid crispness/low moistness, high crispness/mid moistness and
mid crispness/high moistness.
Advanced Statistical Methods
391
