Preface
How does one plan, execute, complete, analyze, interpret, and report sensory tests? Hope-
fully, the practices and recommendations in this book cover all of those phases of sensory
evaluation. The text is meant as a personal reference volume for food scientists, research
and development scientists, cereal chemists, perfumers, and other professionals working
in industry, academia, or government who need to conduct good sensory evaluation. The
book should also supply useful background to marketing research, advertising, and legal
professionals who need to understand the results of sensory evaluation. It could also give
a sophisticated general reader the same understanding.
Because the ﬁrst edition was used as a textbook at the university and professional levels,
partly in courses taught by the authors, the second, third, and fourth editions incorporate a
growing number of ideas and improvements arising out of questions from students. The
objective of the book is now twofold. First, as a “how to” text for professionals, it aims for a
clear and concise presentation of practical solutions, accepted methods, and standard
practices. Second, as a textbook for courses at the academic level, it aims to provide just
enough theoretical background to enable the student to understand which sensory
methods are best suited to particular research problems and situations and how tests
can best be implemented.
The authors do not intend to devote text and readers’ time to resolving controversial
issues, but a few had to be tackled. The second edition was the ﬁrst book to provide an
adequate solution to the problem of similarity testing. This was adopted and further
developed by ISO TC34/SC12 on Sensory Evaluation, resulting in the current “uniﬁed”
procedure (Chapter 6, Section II, p. 60) in which the user’s choice of a- and b-risks deﬁnes
whether difference or similarity is tested for. Another ﬁrst is the uniﬁed treatment of all
ranking tests with the Friedman statistic in preference to Kramer’s tables.
Chapter 11 on the Spectrume method of descriptive sensory analysis, developed by
Civille, has been expanded. The philosophy behind Spectrum is threefold: (1) the test
should be tailored to suit the objective of the study (and not to suit a prescribed
format); (2) the choice of terminology and reference standards should make use not
only of the senses and imagination of the panelists, but also of the accumulated experience
of the sensory profession as recorded in the literature; and (3) a set of calibrated intensity
scales is provided that permits different panels at different times and locations to obtain
comparable and reproducible proﬁles. The chapter now contains full descriptive lexicons
suitable for descriptive analysis of a number of products, e.g., cheese, mayonnaise,
spaghetti sauce, white bread, cookies, and toothpaste. Also new is a set of revised ﬂavor
intensity scales for attributes such as crispness, juiciness, and some common aromatics
and two training exercises.
The authors wish the book to be cohesive and readable; we have tried to substantiate our
directions and organize each section so as to be meaningful. We do not want the book to be
a turgid set of tables, lists, and ﬁgures. We hope we have provided structure to the
methods, reason to the procedures, and coherence to the outcomes. Although our aim is
to describe all tests in current use, we want this to be a reference book that can be read for
understanding as well as a handbook that can serve to describe all major sensory evalu-
ation practices.
