11.2.2
Myth 2: Concept Development Is Unnecessary in Training a Spectrum Panel
Concept development for attributes is critical to lexicon stability. Lexicons are based on
common terminology agreed upon by panelists. Clarifying the concept, through use of
references and examples, stabilizes the communication among the panelists. Creating a
“complex” concept allows panelists to account for parts of the whole that in turn allows
the product developers to understand what attributes make up the whole concept.
Examples of complexes are listed below:
Total Corn Complex
Total Amount of Residue
Total Amount of Color
Raw corn
Oily
Red
Cooked corn
Waxy
Yellow
Toasted corn
Greasy
Blue
Masa
Silicone
Green
11.2.3
Myth 3: All Spectrum Training and Panels Are the Same; Anyone Can Do It
Although knowledge and familiarity are important, to be an effective trainer, one must
have both teaching and group dynamic skills. To maximize the panel’s learning, the
trainer provides authority (clarifying technical issues) and structure (provide a framework
for all panelists to learn). To develop the panel as an independent performing team, the
trainer encourages growth and builds the panel’s conﬁdence. The success of the panel
depends upon it.
11.2.4
Myth 4: Consumer Terms Are Better than Technical Terms
It is not a question as to which is better—consumer terms or technical terms. The project
objective dictates the type of terminology required. Consumer terms reﬂect the language
of the user population (creamy, refreshing, soft). Technical terms provide direct feedback
to product development (vanillin or vanilla). Technical terms can be directly related to the
input of ingredients and process variables.
11.2.5
Myth 5: Spectrum Panelists Are Forced to Use Canned Lexicons
Spectrum panelists discover the terms within the samples. The process with which Spec-
trum panels develop lexicons is:
1. Panelists experience the attributes in an array of products (taste, touch, smell, etc).
2. Panelists report terms, interpret the experience, and record a draft lexicon.
3. Panelists are exposed to attribute references for clariﬁcation.
4. Panelists reﬁne the precise terminology and validate the lexicon with a pair
of samples.
11.2.6
Myth 6: Spectrum Panelists Are Coerced into Intensity Calibration
Providing intensity references increases panel reproducibility and communication.
People look for boundaries in making decisions about amount (“Compared to
what?”). The Spectrum method provides these boundaries by deﬁning the limits of
the sensory experience. Providing a series of levels for different stimuli encourages
panelists to be consistent from time to time and across panelists. In addition, using
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 11
190
