simple and easily understood. Compared with the paired comparison test, it has the
advantage that a reference sample is presented that avoids confusion with respect to
what constitutes a difference, but a disadvantage is that three samples, rather than two,
must be tasted.
Use this method when the test objective is to determine whether a sensory difference
exists between two samples. This method is particularly useful in situations
1. To determine whether product differences result from a change in ingredients,
processing, packaging, or storage
2. To determine whether an overall difference exists, where no speciﬁc attributes
can be identiﬁed as having been affected
The duo–trio test has general application whenever more than 15, and preferably
more than 30, test subjects are available. Two forms of the test exist: the constant
reference mode, in which the same sample, usually drawn from regular production, is
always the reference, and the balanced reference mode, in which both of the samples
being compared are used at random as the reference. Use the constant reference mode
with trained subjects whenever a product well known to them can be used as the
reference. Use the balanced reference mode if both samples are unknown or if
untrained subjects are used.
If there are pronounced aftertastes, the duo–trio test is less suitable than the paired
comparison test (see Chapter 7.2).
6.4.2
Principle of the Test
Present to each subject an identiﬁed reference sample, followed by two coded samples,
one of which matches the reference sample. Ask subjects to indicate which coded sample
matches the reference. Count the number of correct replies and refer to Table 17.10
for interpretation.
6.4.3
Test Subjects
Select, train, and instruct the subjects as described under Section 6.3.3. As a general rule,
the minimum is 16 subjects, but for less than 28, the b-error is high. Discrimination is much
improved if 32, 40, or a larger number can be employed.
6.4.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see p. 66. Offer samples simultaneously, if
possible, or else sequentially. Prepare equal numbers of the possible combinations
(see examples) and allocate the sets at random among the subjects. An example of
a scoresheet (which is the same in the balanced reference and constant reference
modes) is given in Figure 6.5. Space for several duo–trio tests may be provided on
the scoresheet, but do not ask supplementary questions (e.g., the degree or type of
difference or the subject’s preference) as the subject’s choice of matching sample may
bias his response to these additional questions. Count the number of correct
Overall Difference Tests: Duo–Trio Test
73
