The orientation of the attributes with each other reveals their internal correlation
structure. Attributes that fall close to each other on the map are positively correlated
with each other. Attributes that fall on opposite sides of the map are negatively correlated
with each other. Attributes that fall at nearly right angles to each other are not correlated.
More importantly, the location of the attributes to the samples and to the clusters of
respondents reveals the positive and negative drivers of acceptance. Attributes that fall
close to a cluster of respondents are positive drivers for that cluster. Higher intensities are
preferred over the lower intensities of such attributes. Attributes that fall on the opposite
side of the map are negative drivers (lower intensities are preferred). Attributes that fall at
right angles to the cluster are not key drivers for that segment. For example, in
Figure 14.12d, the segment of respondents in the lower right quadrant prefer high inten-
sities of green herbs, onion, celery, and carrot ﬂavors. They dislike a sauce with high
clarity, an appearance dominated by potatoes, and a nonnatural meat ﬂavor.
It is important to understand that in all forms of preference mapping, when it is said that
consumers prefer “low” or “high” intensities of attributes, it should be interpreted as
“low” or “high” in the range of intensities exhibited by the products in the study.
“Low” or “high” in preference mapping does not mean the extremes of the rating scale
used to evaluate the products. Attribute intensities for products from the same category
may range over only 2–5 units on a 15-point scale. There can be a large difference in
acceptance for a product with, for example, a 2.5 intensity as opposed to one with a 4.5
intensity on a key attribute.
14.3.2
External Preference Mapping
An external preference map is more complicated to construct than an internal preference
map. Three statistical methods are used in the analysis. PCA (discussed in Section 14.2.1.2)
is used to develop a perceptual map of the product space based only on the sensory
characteristics of the products. Cluster analysis (discussed in Section 14.2.1.3) is used to
identify preference segments among the consumers. A preference segment is a group of
respondents who exhibit similar patterns of liking across the products in the test but
whose pattern differs in some meaningful way from respondents in another preference
segment. Lastly, regression analysis (discussed in Section 14.2.2.1) is used to link the
sensory information to consumer acceptance through models that use the factor scores
of the samples from the perceptual map to predict the acceptance ratings of the products
from the total respondent base and any preference segments that were identiﬁed in the
cluster analysis (see Figure 14.13).
14.3.2.1
Constructing the Perceptual Map of the Product Space
The perceptual map of the product space is obtained from the PCA of the product-
by-attribute data. The products form the rows (observations) of the dataset and the
sensory attributes form the columns (variables). In keeping with the idea that a map
is being created, the principal components obtained from the analysis are called the key
sensory dimensions of the perceptual space.
Before conducting the PCA, it must be decided if all of the products and all of the
attributes should be included in the analysis. If only one product in the study possesses
supra-threshold intensities of one or more attributes, the PCA is likely to create a factor
dedicated entirely to distinguishing that product from all of the others. The creation of one
or more of these “single-sample dimensions” has the negative side effect of masking
otherwise meaningful differences among the other products in the study. For example,
including one pepperoni pizza in a study with ten plain cheese pizzas might obscure some
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
380
