studies. In a factorial experiment, speciﬁc levels for each of several factors are deﬁned.
A single replication of a factorial experiment consists of all possible combinations of the
levels of the factors. For example, a brewer may be interested in comparing the effects of
two kettle boiling times on the hop aroma of his beer. Furthermore, if the brewer is
currently using two varieties of hops, he may not be sure if the two varieties respond
similarly to changes in kettle boiling time. Combining the two levels of the ﬁrst factor
(kettle boiling time) with the two levels of the second factor (variety of hops) yields four
distinct treatment combinations that form a single replication of a factorial experiment (see
Table 14.6). The experimental variables in a factorial experiment may be quantitative (e.g.,
boiling time) or qualitative (e.g., variety of hops). Any combination of quantitative and
qualitative factors may be run in the same factorial experiment.
An “effect” of a factor is the change (or difference) in the response that results from a
change in the level of the factor. The effects of individual factors are called main effects. For
example, if the entries in Table 14.6 represent the average hop aroma rating of the four beer
samples, the main effect due to boiling time is
ðT1AKT2AÞ CðT1BKT2BÞ
2
(14.12)
APP sauce clarity
APP potato AMT
Segment 2
FL wheat
FL meat identity
Total
TXT potato firm
TXT sauce viscosity
APP potato size
TXT vegetable firm
TXT meat firm
FL carrot
FL sweet
APP green herb AMT
APP solid size
APP solid AMT
FL celery
FL green herbs
FL onion
FL filler
APP surface oil
FL bitter
FL sour
FL black pepper
FL spice blend
TXT oily MF
FL Meat nonnatural
PLS1 (55% Consumer; 53% Sensory)
PLS2 (25% Consumer; 18% Sensory)
Sensory
Consumer
1
0
–1–1
(a)
Segment 1
0
1
FIGURE 14.22
PLS maps illustrating positive and negative drivers by segment. Chart (a) illustrates that segment 1 prefers lots of
large and ﬁrm meat, potato and vegetable pieces and high intensities of meat identity, green herb, carrots, onion
and celery ﬂavors and low intensity of nonnatural meat ﬂavor. Chart (b) illustrates that segment 2 prefers lots of
large ﬁrm potatoes in a clear, low viscosity sauce, high meat identity ﬂavor, low oiliness, and low spiciness
(especially black pepper).
Advanced Statistical Methods
393
