Compared with difference testing, scaling is a more informative—and therefore a more
useful—form of recording the intensity of perception. As with ranking, the results are
critically dependent on how well the panelists have been familiarized with the attribute
under test and with the scale being used. In this respect, three different philosophies have
been applied (Mun˜oz and Civille 1998):
† Universal scaling, in which panelists consider all products and intensities they
have experienced as their highest intensity reference point (example: the Spec-
trum aromatics scale uses the cinnamon impact of Big Red chewing gum as a 13
in intensity on a 15-point scale).
† Product-speciﬁc scaling, in which panelists consider only their experience within
the selected product category in setting their highest reference point (example:
the vanilla impact of typical vanilla cookies was set at 10 on a 15-point product
speciﬁc scale).
† Attribute-speciﬁc scaling, in which panelists consider their experience of the
selected attribute across all products in setting their highest reference point
(example: a speciﬁc toothpaste is assigned the top value of 13 for the peppermint
aromatic in any product).
A common problem with scales is that panelists tend to use only the middle section. For
example, if ciders are judged for intensity of “appley” ﬂavor on a scale of 0–9, subjects will
avoid the numbers 0, 1, and 2 because they tend to keep these in reserve for hypothetical
samples of very low intensity, which may never come. Likewise, the numbers 7, 8, and 9
are avoided in anticipation of future samples of very high intensity, which may never
come. The result is that the scale is distorted. For example, a cider of outstanding apple
intensity may be rated 6.8 by the panel while a cider that is only just above the average
may receive a 6.2.
Although the properties of data obtained from any response scale may vary with the
circumstances of the test (e.g., experience of judges in the test, familiarity of the attribute),
it is typically assumed that:
† Category scaling (ISO term: rating) yields ordinal or interval data;
† Line scaling (ISO term: scoring) yields interval data;
† Magnitude estimation scaling (often called ratio scaling) sometimes, but not
always, yields ratio data.
5.6.1
Category Scaling
A category (or partition) scale is a method of measurement in which the subject is
asked to “rate” the intensity of a particular stimulus by assigning it a value (category)
on a limited, usually numerical, scale. Category scale data are generally considered
to be at least ordinal-level data. They do not generally provide values that measure the
degree (how much) one sample is more than another. On a 7-point category
scale for hardness, a product rated a 6 is not necessarily twice as hard as a product
with a 3 hardness rating. The hardness difference between 3 and 6 may not be the
same as that between 6 and 9. Although attempts are made to encourage panelists to
use all intervals as equal, panelists may also tend to use the categories with equal
frequency, except that they usually avoid the use of the two scale endpoints to
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 5
56
