12.6.3
Types of Quantitative Affective Tests
Affective tests can be classiﬁed into two main categories on the basis of the primary task of
the test:
Task
Test and Type
Questions
Choice
Preference
tests
Which sample do you prefer?
Which sample do you like better?
Rating
Acceptance
tests
How much do you like the product?
How acceptable is the product?
In addition to these questions, which can be asked in several ways using various ques-
tionnaire forms (see as follows), the test design often asks secondary questions about the
reasons for the expressed preference or acceptance (see pp. 279–280 on attribute
diagnostics).
12.6.3.1
Preference Tests
The choice of preference or acceptance for a given affective test should be based on the
project objective. If the project is speciﬁcally designed to pit one product directly against
another in situations such as product improvement or parity with competition, then a
preference test is indicated. The preference test forces a choice of one item over another or
others. What it does not do is indicate whether any of the products are liked or disliked.
Therefore, the researcher must have prior knowledge of the “affective status” of the
current product or competitive product that he or she is testing against.
Preference tests can be classiﬁed as follows:
Test Type
No. of Samples
Preference
Paired preference
2
A choice of one sample over
another (A–B)
Rank preference
3 or more
A relative order of preference of
samples (A–B–C–D)
Multiple paired
preference (all pairs)
3 or more
A series of paired samples with
all samples paired with all
others (A–B, A–C, A–D, B–C,
B–D, C–D)
Multiple paired
preferences (selected
pairs)
3 or more
A series of paired samples with
one or two select samples
(e.g., control) paired with two
or more others (not paired
with each other) (A–C, A–D,
A–E, B–C, B–D, B–E)
See Chapter 7, pp. 105–113 for a discussion of principles, procedures, and analysis of
paired and multipaired tests.
Example 12.3: Paired Preference—Improved Peanut Butter
Problem/situation. In response to consumer requests for a product “with better ﬂavor with
more peanutty character,” a product improvement project has yielded a prototype that
was rated signiﬁcantly more peanutty in an attribute difference test (such as discussed in
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
274
