samples they require. The number of samples in a Plackett–Burman experiment is always
a multiple of four. The number of experimental variables that can be screened with a
Plackett–Burman experiment is, at most, one less than the number of samples (i.e., 4, 5,
6, or 7 variables can be screened with 8 samples; 8, 9, 10, or 11 variables can be screened
with 12 samples; etc.) Box and Draper (1987) present the construction of Plackett–Burman
experiments covering the range from 4 to 27 experimental factors (i.e., for studies involv-
ing 8–28 experimental samples).
14.4.2.3
Analysis of Screening Studies
Both fractional factorials and Plackett–Burman experiments can be analyzed by ANOVA.
However, because of the small number of samples involved, it is sometimes impossible to
compute F-ratios to test for the signiﬁcance of the effects. This happens because, in some
screening experiments, there are no degrees of freedom available for estimating experi-
mental error. Regardless, even when the ANOVA computations can be performed, the
tests are not very sensitive, so that the possibility of missing a real effect (i.e., a type-II
error) is relatively high.
A graphical technique for analyzing screening experiments allows the researcher more
input into the decisions on which variables are affecting the response. The technique is
motivated by the logic that if none of the variables have an impact on the response, then
the values of their estimated effects are actually just random observations from a distri-
bution (assumed to be normal) with a mean of zero. If these estimated effects are plotted
against their corresponding normal random deviates, they should form a straight line
(in the absence of any real effects). If, however, some of the variables affect the response,
then the estimated effects are more than random observations. Real effects will fall off the
line in the plot, either high and to the right (for positive effects) or low and to the left
(for negative effects). The researcher can examine the “normal probability plot” of the
estimated effects, such as presented in Figure 14.25, to decide which variables actually
affect the response.
Constructing a normal probability plot is a four-step process:
1. Estimate the effects of the experimental variables using ANOVA.
2. Rank the estimated effects in increasing order from iZ1 to n.
3. Pair the ordered estimates with the new variable zZFK1[p], where
pZ(3iK1)/(3nC1) and FK1 is the inverse of the standard normal distribution
function. Many statistical computer packages contain a function for computing
the value of z from p (sometimes called “PROBIT”).
4. Plot z vs. the estimated effects using a standard plotting routine, ﬁt (by eyeball) a
straight line to the data, and look for points that fall high and to the right or low
and to the left. These identify the “signiﬁcant” variables.
14.4.3
Response Surface Methodology
The treatment structure known as RSM is essentially a designed regression analysis (see
Montgomery 1976; Giovanni 1983). Unlike factorial treatment structures, where the objec-
tive is to determine if (and how) the factors inﬂuence the response, the objective of an RSM
experiment is to predict the value of a response variable (called the dependent variable)
based on the controlled values of the experimental factors (called independent variables). All
of the factors in an RSM experiment must be quantitative.
Advanced Statistical Methods
399
