Performing cluster analyses to discriminate patterns of liking may uncover groups of
respondents that cross over demographic boundaries known to exist prior to running the
study. As such, cluster analysis has an advantage over this classical approach to
“segmentation.”
Another important application of cluster analysis often arises in external preference
mapping studies (see Section 14.3.2). The number of products that could be included in
the study may exceed the resources available for consumer testing. If descriptive proﬁles
are available for all of the potential products, the perceptual map of the products can be
constructed using PCA. The resulting factor scores of the products can then be submitted
to a cluster analysis to identify groups of similar products. If, for example, only 10 of the 18
possible products can be tested with consumers, a 10-cluster solution would be selected.
One product is selected from each cluster to represent the cluster in the consumer test.
Using cluster analysis in this way ensures to as great a degree as possible that the range of
sensory differences present in all 18 products is preserved among the 10 products that are
tested with consumers.
After clusters of respondents are identiﬁed, correlation analysis, PCA, and/or
regression analyses (to be discussed in the next section) can be performed to determine
the similarity and differences among the clusters in how the perceived attributes relate to
liking. Multiple products/varieties, “niche” marketing, or line extensions may be indi-
cated. Lastly, demographic summaries of each cluster could be performed to determine if
the members form a targetable population for marketing purposes.
14.2.2
Dependent and Independent Variables
For this set of methods, the values of some variable(s) are viewed as being dependent on
the values of the other (independent) variables in the set. The statistical methods for such
data either use the independent variables to predict the value of a continuous dependent
variable, or they use the independent variables to group observations into particular
categories of a discrete dependent variable. Even when both dependent and independent
variables are present, a researcher should ﬁrst apply the methods described in the
previous section to uncover fundamental relationships among all the variables (using
both correlation and PCA) and to determine if all the observations can be analyzed as a
single group or if clusters exist that display distinctly different patterns of relationships
(via cluster analysis). These preliminary analyses help to ensure that a meaningful and
complete summary of the information contained in the data is obtained.
14.2.2.1
Regression Analysis
Predicting the value of one variable based on the values of one or more other variables has
become commonplace. Consumer acceptability has been predicted by descriptive data or
by formula and process values. Descriptive data values have been predicted by instru-
mental results. The perceived intensity of various responses has been predicted based on
the intensity (or concentration) of a stimulus using either psychophysical models (e.g.,
Stevens’ law) or by kinetic models (e.g., the Michaelis–Menten/Beidler equation). All of
these examples use regression analysis to relate the value of a continuous dependent
variable to the values of one or more independent variables.
Regression can be used simply to predict the value of a response or, not so simply, to
determine what and how changes in one variable cause changes in another. By itself,
regression analysis does not yield causal relationships. If a researcher comes prepared
with hypotheses about the dynamics of a system, then regression analysis can be used to
test the validity of the hypothesized relationships. In general, however, a highly accurate
Advanced Statistical Methods
365
