view. After reviewing the results with the sensory analyst and the product developer, a
three-dimensional solution was chosen.
The three dimensions can be interpreted by examining the factor loading of the attributes
on each dimension. Factor loadings are similar to correlation coefﬁcients. They range in
value from K1 to C1. Values close to either extreme indicate a strong association between
the attribute and the dimension. Small values (!G0.6, for example) indicate a weak associ-
ation. Focusing on the larger factor loadings helps in the interpretation of each dimension.
Examination of the factor loadings in Table 14.4 reveals that the ﬁrst sensory dimension
deals, in general, with the overall “wholesomeness” of the products. On the ﬁrst dimen-
sion, the products range from those that are high in nonnatural meat ﬂavor to those that
are high in meat identity with lots of large and ﬁrm meat, potato, and vegetable pieces, and
high intensities of green herb, carrot, and celery ﬂavors.
The second sensory dimension is a combination of sauce appearance and texture and
spiciness. Products range from those with thin and clear sauces to products with viscous
sauces. The products with viscous sauces also tend to be high in spicy/black pepper
character. For brevity, the second dimension will be call “sauce: clear to viscous.” The third
sensory dimension clearly capturesthe differencesin the perceived “oiliness” of the products.
This brings up an important point of caution regarding perceptual mapping. The dimen-
sions that emerge on the map are based on the correlations that exist among the sensory
attributes that are included in the analysis. Some of these correlations may be inherent in the
product category. For example, it may be natural in this category for the thinner sauces to
have higher clarity and for the thicker sauces to be more translucent or opaque. However,
some of the correlations may be strictly coincidental, resulting only from the speciﬁc set of
products that were included in the analysis. For example, thick, translucent sauces do not
have to be high in spicy and black pepper notes. When interpreting the sensory dimensions,
it is important to distinguish between the relationships that are inherent to the product
category from those that are coincidental to the products that were included in the study.
Naming the sensory dimensions has both good and bad effects. Names aid in interpre-
tation and add a comforting level of familiarity to the results. Referring to the perceptual
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Number of factors
Eigenvalue
FIGURE 14.14
A scree plot of the eigenvalues from the PCA can help decide how many factors to include on the perceptual map.
Advanced Statistical Methods
383
