Sample 4 had a signiﬁcantly greater average rating than all of the other samples.
Samples 2 and 5, with nearly identical average ratings, had signiﬁcantly less hop character
than Sample 4 and signiﬁcantly more than Samples 1 and 3. Samples 1 and 3 showed
signiﬁcantly less hop character than Samples 2, 4, and 5.
Interpret and report results: The sensory analyst’s report to the brewer contains the table of
sample means and the ANOVA table and concludes that, of the ﬁve samples tested,
sample 4 produced a signiﬁcantly higher level of hop character. Sample 2, of a less
expensive variety, also merits consideration.
7.7
Multisample Difference Test: BIB Ranking Test (Balanced
Incomplete Block Design)—Friedman Analysis
7.7.1
Scope and Application
Use this method when the test objective is to determine in which way a particular sensory
attribute varies over a number of samples and there are too many samples to evaluate at
any one time. Typically, the method is used when the number of samples to be compared is
from 6 to 12 or, at most, 16.
Choose the present method (ranking) when the panelists are relatively untrained for the
type of sample and/or a relatively simple statistical analysis is preferred. Use the method
described in Section 7.8 (rating) when panelists trained to use a rating scale are available.
7.7.2
Principle of the Test
Instead of presenting all t samples as one large block, present them in a number of smaller
blocks according to one of the designs of Cochran and Cox (1957) or e.g., Design Express
(2003). Ask subjects to rank the samples according to the attribute of interest.
7.7.3
Test Subjects
Select, train, and instruct the subjects as described on p. 66. Ascertain that subjects can
recognize the attribute of interest, e.g., by training with sets of known intensity levels in
the attribute, see p. 144 and pp. 213–224.
7.7.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see pp. 25 and 34. Offer samples simultaneously if
possible, or else sequentially. Refer to p. 66 for details of the procedure. Make certain that
order of presentation is truly random; subjects must not be led to suspect a regular pattern,
as this will inﬂuence verdicts. For example, state only to “Rank the samples according to
sweetness, giving rank 1 to the sample of lowest sweetness, rank 2 to the next lowest, etc.”
Example 7.8: Species of Fish
Problem/situation: Military ﬁeld ration XPQ-6 (ﬁsh ﬁngers in aspic) has been prepared in the
past from 15 different species ofﬁsh. Serious complaints of “ﬁshy” ﬂavor have been traced to
the use of some of these species. Those in command want to specify a limited number of
species so as to be able to weigh availability and price against the probability of food riots.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 7
122
