3. It follows that if results are to be useful, selection of the terms for classiﬁcation
(and for the various forms of scaling discussed in Section 5.6) must be based
on actual product characteristics. This in turn requires preexamination of the
samples by a well-trained panel to ensure that all appropriate attributes are
listed. The use of a list or lists of terms taken from previous studies may
neglect to include attributes which are important in the current study, or the
“old” list may include terms that are irrelevant to the current samples and
thus confusing to the panelists.
Following are some examples of word lists that have been used for classiﬁcation tasks or
for subsequent rating tasks:
1. After feel of skincare products, e.g., soaps, lotions, creams: tacky, smooth, greasy,
supple, grainy, waxy, oily, astringent, taut, dry, moist, and creamy. Note that no
relationship is introduced between the attributes that may, in fact, be facets of the
same parameter (moist/dry, smooth/grainy, etc.)
2. Spice notes (subjects may be asked to deﬁne which spices or herbs contribute to
one overall spice complex): oregano, basil, thyme, sage, rosemary, marjoram,
and/or clove, cinnamon, nutmeg, mace, cardamom.
3. Hair color/hair condition: panelists/hairdressers are asked to classify the
hair color and hair condition of men and women who are to serve as subjects
for half-head shampoos; such sorting may be necessary to balance
all treatments.
For each subject, check the most appropriate descriptor(s) from each column:
Color of Hair
Condition of Hair
Blond
Healthy
Brown
Damaged
Red
Dull
Black
Split
Tinted/frosted
Oily scalp
Dandruff
5.4
Grading
Grading is a method of evaluation used frequently in commerce that depends on expert
“graders” who learn the scale used from other graders. Scales usually have four or ﬁve
steps such as “Choice,” “Extra,” “Regular,” and “Reject.” Examples of items subjected to
sensory grading are coffee, tea, spices, butter, ﬁsh, and meat.
Sensory grading most often involves a process of integration of perceptions by the
grader. The grader is asked to give one overall rating of the combined effect of the presence
of the positive attributes, the blend or balance of those attributes, the absence of negative
characteristics, and/or the comparison of the products being graded with some written or
physical standard.
Grading systems can be quite elaborate and useful in commerce, where they protect the
consumer against being offered low-quality products at a high price, while permitting the
producer to recover the extra costs associated with provision of a high-quality product.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 5
54
