As another approach, diaries are provided to respondents to complete in their own
environment during product use. Consumers record actual steps along the process, and
emotions surrounding all phases of product usage, from decision making to purchase and
disposal, in a journal. This approach captures thoughts, ideas, and steps immediately—in
the moment—so that consumers do not need to rely on memory. Diaries therefore provide
a more complete truthful picture. Diaries and journals are enhanced when photographs or
video are added.
Community narratives, also referred to as storytelling, is a qualitative research method in
which a creative consumer group is encouraged to share experiences with products and to
express their feelings. Consumers describe experiences or situations in their own words.
The participants in the group are typically users of a category of products, not a speciﬁc
brand. Both established and innovative qualitative data collection methods are used in the
context of ongoing relationships within groups of target consumers. While traditional
focus groups allow only a short time to probe the feelings and actions of representative
consumer groups, storytelling employs multiple sessions to allow the same creative,
articulate consumers to build community within their group. This process leads to more
honest communication, enhanced creativity, and increased discernment of the target
product category and/or concept.
Community narrative techniques probe beyond surface consumer attitudes, behaviors,
and feelings to allow researchers to learn at a deeper emotional level than traditional
sensory methods. Consumers are encouraged to express their experiences and feelings,
allowing motivations and unarticulated needs to be uncovered and new insights to
emerge, often by building on other group members’ ideas. Using literal and ﬁgurative
exercises, the storytelling process provides focus on the researcher’s initial questions
while allowing spontaneous “verbal excursions” by group members. Understanding
consumer responses on product sensory attributes is a major outcome.
12.4.4
Design of Fuzzy Front End Research
The keys steps to working at the fuzzy front end can be broken down into a framework,
called I-SIGHT. This is a dynamic framework that can be used throughout the product
development process. Speciﬁc steps of this framework are:
1. Innovate: stimulate creativity and innovation through team building
2. Synthesize current knowledge: summarize the known and the unknown, clarify
facts and opinions
3. Identify objectives: deﬁne opportunities and set objectives for the research
4. Generate data through carefully designed research
a. Choose or create the right method to meet the project objective
b. Take the path to conduct the research—the preparation phase
c. Gather the information
5. Harvest ideas: uncover the truth underneath the data by organizing, sorting, and
relating the information
6. Take action: determine an action plan to move on to the next step of a project
Design of research at this stage of a project can take more time and thought than
standard qualitative or quantitative research because it is speciﬁcally designed for the
project or concept being studied. Additional considerations in the design of research at
the fuzzy front end are discussed in the following sections.
Affective Tests: Affective Test Methods—Fuzzy Front End
267
