the changes in overall liking that result from varying the remaining dimension from its
low to its high level. Repeat the process for all of the signiﬁcant sensory dimensions.
Figure 14.18 reveals that the “wholesomeness” dimension has a strong positive impact
on overall liking—higher levels are preferred. The “sauce: clear to viscous” dimension also
has a signiﬁcant impact on overall liking. A medium-high level of this dimension is most
well-liked. The line for the “oiliness” dimension is ﬂat, indicating that this dimension has
no signiﬁcant impact on liking.
The predicted liking ratings for any point on the preference map can be illustrated in a
contour plot (discussed in Section 14.4) (see Figure 14.19). Also included in the ﬁgure is the
convex hull formed by the test products. The convex hull represents the limits of the
product space. Predictions of points that fall outside of the product space are extrapol-
ations and should be viewed with caution. Although the regression model may indicate
that moving farther in a certain direction should have a positive impact on liking, because
there are no data for points outside of the product space, there is no way to tell how far the
trend continues. The predicted values for points outside of the product space could be
quite unreliable.
The point that is predicted to be most well-liked is identiﬁed in Figure 14.19 as the
“target” product. When the target lies on the edge of the product space, as it does in this
example, the direction of increasing liking that is indicated by the regression model can be
denoted as an area of opportunity. No predicted liking values are given, but the analysis
does indicate that this area may deserve some additional exploration.
14.3.2.4
Reverse Engineering the Proﬁle of the Target Product
At the same time as the regression models for the overall liking data are developed,
regression models that use the factor scores of the samples to predict the original
sensory attributes are built. Only the linear terms are included in the models and no
variable selection procedures are applied, so each sensory attribute is predicted by all of
the sensory dimensions. The factor scores that correspond to the target product are
plugged into the models for the individual sensory attributes to obtain the sensory
proﬁle that is predicted to correspond to the target product (see Table 14.5).
7.5
6.5
5.5
Overall liking
Total respondent base
Factor ranges
A: "Wholesomeness"
B: "Sauce: Clear to viscous"
C: "Oily"
Low
Middle
High
C
CA
B
B
A
FIGURE 14.18
Perturbation chart of the key-drivers model for the total respondent base. “Wholesomeness” (A) and “sauce: clear
to viscous” (B) are both equally important to overall liking. “Oily” (C) does not have a signiﬁcant impact on liking.
The high level of “wholesomeness” and the medium-high level of “sauce: clear to viscous” are preferred.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
388
