Test report: Include the complete Table 8.1 and give demographics of the panelists.
Example 8.2: Threshold of Isovaleric Acid in Air
Problem/situation: A rendering plant produces air emissions containing isovaleric acid as
the most ﬂavor-active component. The neighbors complain, and an ordinance is passed
requiring a reduction below threshold.
Project objective: To choose between various process alternatives and a higher chimney.
Test objective: To determine the threshold of isovaleric acid in air.
Test design: A fairly thorough method such as the ASTM Intermediate Method (E1432) or
the second example of ISO Standard 13301 is suitable because of the economic conse-
quences of the issue. Use a dynamic olfactometer (CEN 1997) and twenty panelists.
Give each panelist 3-AFC tests six times at each of ﬁve or more concentrations spaced
twofold apart and chosen in advance (see below). The apparatus contains three sniff ports;
the panelist knows that two produce odor-free air and must choose the one that he believes
to contain added isovaleric acid. The added concentration is at the lowest level in the ﬁrst
test and increases by a constant factor in each subsequent test. From the percentage of
correct results at each concentration, calculate each panelist’s threshold and from these,
the group threshold.
Screen samples: Ascertain that the air supply is free from detectable odors and that the
isovaleric acid is of sensory purity and free from foreign odors. Check the reliability of the
olfactometer by chemical analysis.
Conduct the test: Test each panelist in turn at the chosen concentrations. Make this
choice, in advance, by a single test (or a few tests) at each of a set of widely spaced
concentrations (e.g., 2.5, 10, 40, 160, and 640 ppb). In the test, if a panelist should score
100% correct at the lowest concentration, reschedule the concentration series with this
as the highest. Likewise, if a panelist scores less than 80% correct at the highest
concentration, continue the series by presenting higher concentrations until this no
longer happens.
Analyze the results: Plot the data as shown in Figure 8.4 in which the abscissa is the
concentration, x (or log concentration) and the ordinate is the proportion distinguishers
(or percent correct above chance), pd. pd is obtained from the proportion correct, pc, as
follows:
Test
Formula
Chance Level
Triangle or 3-AFC
pdZ1.5!pcK0.5
0.333
Paired comparison or 2-AFC
pdZ2.0!pcK1.0
0.500
Two-out-of-ﬁve
pdZ1.111!pcK0.111
0.100
Calculate the individual thresholds by one of the six curve-ﬁtting methods allowed
by ASTM E1432 or ISO 13301 (e.g., by logistic regression using a computer package as
shown in Figure 8.4). Plot the individual thresholds in a rank/probability graph, as shown
in Figure 8.5, and obtain the group threshold as the 50% point. If a straight line can be
drawn through the points, conclude that the panelists represent a normal distribution and
that other points of interest can be read from the graph, e.g., that concentration that 10% of
a population similar to the panel can detect.
Test report: Include the information in Table 8.2 and Figure 8.5 and give demographics of
the panelists.
Determining Threshold
135
