that need to be applied to the skin in half-face tests, and samples that are very complex
stimuli and are mentally confusing to the panelists.
As with other overall difference tests, the same/different test is effective in situations:
1. To determine whether product differences result from a change in ingredients,
processing, packaging, or storage.
2. To determine whether an overall difference exists, where no speciﬁc attribute(s)
can be identiﬁed as having been affected.
This test is somewhat time consuming because the information on possible product
differences is obtained by comparing responses obtained from different pairs (A/B and
B/A) with those obtained from matched pairs (A/A and B/B). The presentation of the
matched pair enables the sensory analyst to evaluate the magnitude of the “placebo effect”
of simply asking a difference question.
6.6.2
Principle of the Test
Present each subject with two samples, asking whether the samples are the same or
different. In half of the pairs, present the two different samples; in half of the pairs,
present a matched pair (the same sample, twice). Analyze results by comparing the
number of “different” responses for the matched pairs to the number of “different”
responses for the different pairs, using the c2-test.
6.6.3
Test Subjects
Generally, 20–50 presentations of each of the four sample combinations (A/A, B/B, A/B,
B/A) are required to determine differences. Up to 200 different subjects can be used, or 100
subjects may receive two of the pairs. If the same/different test has been chosen because of
the complexity of the stimuli, then no more than one pair should be presented to any one
subject at a time. Subjects may be trained or untrained but panels should not consist of
mixtures of the two.
6.6.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see p. 66. Offer samples simultaneously if possible,
or else successively. Prepare equal numbers of the four pairs and present them at random
to the subjects, if each is to evaluate only one pair. If the test is designed such that each
subject is to evaluate more than one pair (one matched and one different or all four
combinations), then records of each subject’s test scores must be kept. Typical worksheets
and scoresheets are given in Example 6.10.
6.6.5
Analysis and Interpretation of Results
See Example 6.10.
Example 6.10: Replacing a Processing Cooker for Barbecue Sauce
Problem/situation: In an attempt to modernize a condiment plant a manufacturer must
replace an old cooker used to process barbecue sauce. The plant manager would like to
Overall Difference Tests: Same/Different Test (or Simple Difference Test)
85
