is possible with many descriptive techniques, project leaders are often concerned with just
how different a sample or prototype is from the standard. The determination of an overall
difference (see difference-from-control test, Chapter 6, Section 6.8) allows the project
management to make decisions regarding disposition of a sample based on its relative
distance from the control; the accompanying descriptive information provides insight into
the source and size of the relative attributes of the control and the sample.
Hedonic ratings. It is a temptation to ask the descriptive panel, once the description has
been completed, to rate the overall acceptance of the product. In most cases, this temp-
tation is to be resisted, as the panel, through its training process, has been removed from
the world of consumers and is no longer representative of any section of the general
public. Training tends to change the personal preferences of panelists. As they become
more aware of the various attributes of a product, panelists tend to differently weigh
attributes from the way a regular consumer would in terms of each attribute’s contribution
to the overall quality, blend, or balance.
10.4
Commonly Used Descriptive Test Methods
Over the last 40 years, many descriptive analysis methods have been developed, and some
have gained and maintained popularity as standard methods (ASTM 1992, 1996). The fact
that these methods are described below is a reﬂection of their popularity, but it does not
constitute a recommendation for use. On the contrary, a sensory analyst who needs to
develop a descriptive system for a speciﬁc product and project application should study
the literature on descriptive methods and should review several methods and combi-
nations of methods before selecting the descriptive analysis system that can provide the
most comprehensive, accurate, and reproducible description of each product and the best
discrimination between products. See ASTM (1992) that also contains case studies of four
methods, and review the IFT Sensory Evaluation Guide (IFT 1981) that contains 109
references from different ﬁelds. A recent review of the literature and presentations in
sensory science reveals no new descriptive analysis methods. Modiﬁcations of already-
existing methods are common and encouraged in customizing a descriptive analysis
method and panel to document the sensory properties of a product or product category.
10.4.1
The Flavor Proﬁle Method
The ﬂavor proﬁle method was developed by Arthur D. Little, Inc. in the late 1940s (Keane
1992). It involves the analysis of a product’s perceived aroma and ﬂavor characteristics,
their intensities, order of appearance, and aftertaste by a panel offour to six trained judges.
An amplitude rating (see previous page) is generally included as part of the proﬁle.
Panelists are selected on the basis of a physiological test for taste discrimination, taste
intensity discrimination, and olfactory discrimination and description. A personal inter-
view is conducted to determine interest, availability, and potential for working in a
group situation. For training, panelists are provided with a broad selection of reference
samples representing the product range as well as examples of ingredient and processing
variables for the product type. Panelists, with the panel leader’s help in providing and
maintaining reference samples, develop and deﬁne the common terminology to be used
by the entire panel. The panel also develops a common frame of reference for the use of the
seven-point Flavor Proﬁle intensity scale shown in Chapter 5, p. 57.
The panelists, seated at a round or hexagonal table, individually evaluate one sample at
a time for both aroma and ﬂavor, and they record the attributes (called “character notes”),
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 10
178
