categories. Regardless, the linear combination(s) of the original variables that best separate
the categories is the one that maximizes the ratio:
Variance between category means
Variance within categories
In addition to this ratio, the quality of the discriminant function is measured by the
proportion of the items that it correctly classiﬁes. This evaluation can be carried out by
using the same observations that were used to build the discriminant function. However,
when sufﬁcient data are available, it is preferable to withhold some of the observations
from the model building analysis and use them only after the fact to verify that the
discriminant function performs the classiﬁcation task satisfactorily. As such, the veriﬁca-
tion process is more objective.
Not all of the original independent variables may be needed to accurately classify each
item. As in regression analysis, there are four commonly used variable selection criteria:
forward inclusion, backward elimination, stepwise, and all-possible-functions. In each,
the criterion for determining the value of a variable is the degree to which it contributes to
the discrimination among the categories. Powers and Ware (1986) present a summary of a
stepwise discriminant analysis in which six blue-cheese products were best categorized by
using only 14 of the original 28 proﬁle attributes.
The Powers and Ware reference just cited is a comprehensive discussion of applied
discriminant analysis in sensory evaluation. Two alternatives to linear discriminant
analysis, canonical discriminant analysis and nearest-neighbor discriminant analysis,
are discussed. A variety of industrial applications, relations to other multivariate tech-
niques, and relevant computer software concerns are also presented. Analysts interested
in performing discriminant analysis are encouraged to familiarize themselves with the
material presented there.
14.3
Preference Mapping
Preference mapping is a collection of multivariate techniques for illustrating the relation-
ships between sensory (and sometimes instrumental) data and consumer acceptance.
Preference mapping studies go by many names, including: category appraisals, competi-
tive assessments, product space mappings, and key drivers analyses, among others. The
variety of names can lead to confusion. For example, whereas one organization may refer
to preference mapping studies as category appraisals, another might reserve the term
category appraisals for studies that track marketing information, such as share of sales,
advertising initiatives, new line extensions, etc. Whereas some perceive the term “prefer-
ence mapping” as being too technical, when discussing this approach, it is important to
use the term that colleagues understand appropriately and not confuse with some other
test method.
Another source of confusion is that there are several varieties of preference maps. The
two major varieties are internal preference mapping and external preference mapping. In
this chapter, PLS is presented as a third variety of preference mapping. A feature that
discriminates the three approaches is the information that is used to locate the test
products on the maps. Internal preference mapping uses consumer acceptance ratings
to locate the products on the maps. External preference mapping uses sensory descriptive
attribute ratings to locate the products on the maps. PLS mapping uses both the consumer
and the sensory data to locate the products on the maps.
Advanced Statistical Methods
375
