the original variables is included in the computation of each principal component.
Retaining only a small group of representative variables on a sensory ballot ignores the
multivariate nature of the effects of the original variables, would not allow for future
veriﬁcation of the stability of the principal components, and could lead to misleading
results in future evaluations.
14.2.1.3
Cluster Analysis
In the same spirit that PCA identiﬁes groups of attributes based on their degree of corre-
lated behavior, the multivariate statistical method cluster analysis identiﬁes groups of
observations based on the degree of similarity among their ratings. The ratings may be
different attributes collected on a single sample or a single attribute collected on a variety
of samples. There are a large number of cluster analysis algorithms in common use at
present; therefore, no fair treatment of the computational details of cluster analysis could
be presented in a general discussion such as this. Interested readers are referred to
Jacobsen and Gunderson (1986) for their discussion of applied cluster analysis that
includes a step-by-step example, a list of food science applications, and a list of texts
and computer programs on the topic. Godwin, Barmann, and Powers (1978) present an
interesting application of cluster analysis in which sensory attributes and instrumental
measurements are grouped based on their relation to concomitantly collected hedonic
Nippy's
Product X
Citrus Tree
Frucci
Valencio
Just Orange
Spring Valley
Cerebos No. 1
Cerebos No. 2
Perfect Orange
IDEAL
Just Juice
Hi
Tropicana
Fresh 'n' Juicy
Pulpiness
Sweetness
Color
Thickness
Natural color
Sourness
After taste
Component 1
30
20
10
0
0
10
20
30
Component 2
Bitterness
Orange flavor
Ole
Cerebos blend
-C
FIGURE 14.4
Results of a PCA on orange drinks showing both the relationships of the products to each other and the associ-
ations among the original descriptive attributes. The plot of the products is offset from the plot of the attributes to
aid the visual presentation while maintaining the relative directions and magnitudes. For example, Hi-C is high in
sweet and low in sour and bitter, whereas Cerebos No. 2 is less sweet and relatively high in pulp, color. (From
H.R. Cooper, M.D. Earle, and C.M. Triggs. 1989. Product Testing with Consumers for Research Guidance, L.S. Wu, ed.,
Philadelphia, PA: ASTM International. With permission.)
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 14
362
