The value of c2 in Equation 13.10 is compared to the upper-a critical value of a
c2-distribution with (rK1)(cK1) degrees of freedom. If the analyst chooses aZ0.10
(i.e., 10% signiﬁcance level), then the critical value c2
0.10,1Z2.71 (from Table 17.5).
Because c2Z5.39Oc2
0.10,1Z2.71, the analyst concludes at the 10% signiﬁcance level that
product A is not equally preferred over product B in both regions. Regional formulations
may have to be considered.
13.3.5
Calculating Sample Sizes in Discrimination Tests
The sample size required for a discrimination test is a function of the test sensitivity
parameters, a, b, and pd, or in the case of directional difference tests, pmax. Table 17.7,
Table 17.9, Table 17.11, and Table 17.13 can be used to ﬁnd sample sizes for commonly
chosen values of the parameters. Alternatively, researchers can use a spreadsheet to
perform the necessary calculations. The “Test Sensitivity Analyzer” has been developed
in Microsoft Excel to allow researchers to study how various choices of a, b, and pd (or pmax)
affect the sample size and the number of correct responses necessary to claim that a
difference exists or that the samples are similar (see Figure 13.9). The Test Sensitivity
Analyzer does this indirectly by letting the researcher choose values for the same size,
n, the number of correct responses, x, and the maximum allowable proportion of distin-
guishers, pd. (Although pd is not meaningful in a directional difference test, the value of
pmax is computed based on the value entered for pd.) The Test Sensitivity Analyzer then
computes values for a and b. By adjusting the values of n, x, and pd, the researcher can ﬁnd
the set of values that provides the best compromise between test sensitivity and
available resources.
The binomial distribution, upon which discrimination tests are based, is a discrete
probability distribution. Only integer values for the sample size, n, and the number of
correct responses, x, are valid. Small changes in n and x can have large impacts on the
probabilities a and b, particularly for small values of n. Generally, it is not possible to select
values of n, x, and pd (or pmax) that yield values for a and b that are exactly equal to their
target values. Instead, the researcher must select values for n, x, and pd (or pmax) that yield
values for a and b that are close to their targets.
As illustrated in Figure 13.9, the researcher wants to conduct a duo–trio test for simi-
larity with the following target sensitivity values: aZ0.25, bZ0.10, and pdZ25%. Strictly
speaking, the values of n and x should be chosen so that both a and b are no greater than
their target values. However, the researcher only has access to 60 assessors. Setting nZ60,
the researcher ﬁnds that xZ33 correct responses yields values for a and b that are quite
close to their targets, although the value for aZ0.26 is slightly larger than desired.
By adjusting n and x, the researcher ﬁnds that nZ67 assessors with xZ37 correct responses
would be needed to yield values for a and b that are both at or below their targets.
The researcher decides that the 60-assessor test is adequate, given that is the maximum
number of assessors available and that the a-risk is only 1% greater than the target value.
The Test Sensitivity Analyzer is a useful tool for planning discrimination tests.
Researchers quickly can run a variety of scenarios with different values of n, x, and pd
(or pmax) to observe the resulting impacts on a-risk and b-risk, selecting the values that
offer the best compromise solution. The Test Sensitivity Analyzer can be programmed in
Excel by making the entries in the cells indicated in Table 13.8. The explanatory text is
entered in the appropriate cells, using fonts and sizes necessary to achieve the desired
visual effect.
In testing for similarity or in the uniﬁed approach, the number of correct responses, x,
should not be chosen to be less than the number that would be expected by chance alone
(e.g., n/3 in a triangle test, n/2 in a duo–trio test, etc.). Such values correspond to negative
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 13
332
