which is greater than the value in Table 17.5 (dfZ1, a-riskZ0.05, c2Z3.84), i.e., a signi-
ﬁcant difference exists.
Note: The c2-analysis just presented is not entirely appropriate because of the multiple
evaluations performed by each respondent. However, no computationally convenient
alternative method is currently available. The levels of signiﬁcance obtained from this
test should be considered approximate values.
Interpret results: The results indicate that the 0.1% sweetener solution is signiﬁcantly
different from the 5% sucrose solution. The sensory analyst informs the development
chemist that the particular sweetener is likely to cause a detectable change in ﬂavor of the
beverage. The next logical step may be a descriptive analysis to characterize the difference.
One might ask “What would it take for the difference to be nonsigniﬁcant?” This would
be the case if results had been:
60
50
40
50
for which c2 equals 2.02, a value less than 3.84. See ISO (1987) for a number of
similar examples.
6.8
Difference-from-Control Test
6.8.1
Scope and Application
Use this test when the project or test objective is twofold, both (1) to determine whether a
difference exists between one or more samples and a control, and (2) to estimate the size of
any such differences. Generally one sample is designated the “control,” “reference,” or
“standard,” and all other samples are evaluated with respect to how different each is from
that control.
The difference-from-control test is useful in situations in which a difference may be
detectable, but the size of the difference affects the decision about the test objective.
Quality assurance/quality control and storage studies are cases in which the relative
size of a difference from a control is important for decision making. The difference-
from-control test is appropriate where the duo–trio and triangle tests cannot be used
because of the normal heterogeneity of products such as meats, salads, and baked goods.
The difference-from-control test can be used as a two-sample test in situations where
multiple sample tests are inappropriate because of fatigue or carryover effects. The
difference-from-control test is essentially a simple difference test with an added assess-
ment of the size of the difference.
6.8.2
Principle of the Test
Present to each subject a control sample plus one or more test samples. Ask subjects to rate
the size of the difference between each sample and the control and provide a scale for this
purpose. Indicate to the subject that some of the test samples may be the same as the
control. Evaluate the resulting mean difference-from-control estimates by comparing them
to the difference-from-control obtained with the blind controls.*
* The use of the estimate obtained with the blind controls amounts to obtaining a measure of the placebo effect.
This estimate represents the numerical effect of simply asking the difference question, when in fact no difference
exists.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 6
92
