The organization of the chapters and sections is also straightforward. Chapter 1 lists the
steps involved in a sensory evaluation project, and Chapter 2 brieﬂy reviews the workings
of our senses. In Chapter 3, we list what is required of the equipment, the tasters, and the
samples; while in Chapter 4, we have collected a list of those psychological pitfalls that
invalidate many otherwise good studies. Chapter 5 discusses how sensory responses can
be measured in quantitative terms. In Chapter 6, we describe all the common sensory tests
for difference, the Triangle, Duo–trio, etc.; and, in Chapter 7, the various attribute tests,
such as ranking and numerical intensity scaling, are discussed. Thresholds and just-
noticeable differences are brieﬂy discussed in Chapter 8, followed by what we consider
the main chapters: Chapter 9 on selection and training of tasters, Chapters 10 and 11 on
descriptive testing, and Chapter 12 on affective tests (consumer tests). All the descriptive
references have been reviewed and revised for the Spectrum references in Chapter 11.
Chapter 12 deﬁnes, in detail, several qualitative and quantitative classic methods for
testing with consumers and includes substantial reviews of “fuzzy front end” and internet
research techniques.
The body of text on statistical procedures is found in Chapters 13 and 14, but, in
addition, each method (Triangle, Duo–trio, etc.) in Chapters 6 and 7 is followed by a
number of examples showing how statistics are used in the interpretation of each. Basic
concepts for tabular and graphical summaries, hypothesis testing, and the design of
sensory panels are presented in Chapter 13. We refrain from detailed discussion of statisti-
cal theory, preferring instead to give examples. Chapter 14 discusses multifactor
experiments that can be used, for example, to screen for variables that have large effects
on a product, to identify variables that interact with each other in how they affect product
characteristics, or to identify the combination of variables that maximize some desirable
product characteristic such as consumer acceptability. Chapter 14 also contains a discus-
sion of multivariate techniques that can be used to summarize large numbers of responses
with fewer, meaningful ones to identify relationships among responses that might other-
wise go unnoticed, and to group respondents of samples that exhibit similar patterns of
behavior. New in the fourth edition is an overview of Thurstonian Scaling. In addition to
studying differences among products, Thurstonian Scaling can be used to uncover the
decision processes used by assessors during their evaluations of products. Also new in the
fourth edition is a detailed discussion of data-relationship techniques used to link data
from diverse sources collected on the same set of samples. The techniques are used to
identify relationships, for example, between instrumental and sensory data or between
sensory and consumer data. They can reveal the sensory and instrumental characteristics
of products that have the greatest impact on acceptance and the intensities of these
characteristics that are predicted to be most well liked by consumers.
At the end of the book, the reader will ﬁnd guidelines for the choice of techniques and
for reporting results plus the usual glossaries, indexes, and statistical tables.
With regard to terminology, the terms assessor, judge, panelist, respondent, subject, and
taster are used interchangeably as are he, she, and (s)he for the sensory analyst (the
sensory professional, the panel leader) and for individual panel members.
