9.4.2.5
Mock Panel
Some companies further screen panelist candidates by inviting them to a “mock panel” at
which they are asked to evaluate and comment on two or more products. Candidates are
presented with the products, write down their perceptions (sensory parameters described
by the session panel leader, e.g., “The ﬂavor and texture of these crackers”). The panel
leader then directs a discussion of the results that provides each panelist a time to express
his or her perceptions. Observation of the panelists’ behavior is helpful in deciding which
candidates work best in a group, express concepts clearly, and participate in discussions of
different perceptions.
9.4.3
Training for Descriptive Testing
The important aspect of any training sequence is to provide a structured framework for
learning based on demonstrated facts and to allow the students, in this case panelists, to
grow in both skills and conﬁdence. Most descriptive panel training programs require
between 40 and 120 h of training. The amount of time needed depends on the complexity
of the product (wine, beer, and coffee panels require far more time than those evaluating
lotions, creams or breakfast cereals), on the number of attributes to be covered (a short-
version descriptive technique for quality control or storage studies, Chapter 11, p. 193,
requires fewer and simpler attributes), and on the requirements for validity and reliability
(a more experienced panel will provide greater detail with greater reproducibility).
9.4.3.1
Terminology Development
The panel leader or panel trainer, in conjunction with the project team, must identify key
product variables to be demonstrated to the panel during the initial stages of training. The
project team should prepare a prototype or collect an array of products from commercially
available samples as a frame of reference that represents as many of the attribute
differences likely to be encountered in the product category as possible. The panel is
ﬁrst introduced to the chemical (olfaction, taste, chemical feeling factors) and physical
principles (rheological, geometrical, etc.) that govern or inﬂuence the perception of
each product attribute. With these concepts and terms as a foundation, the panel then
develops procedures for evaluation and terminology with deﬁnitions and references for
the product class.
Examples of this process are discussed by Szczesniak and Kleyn (1963) for oral texture,
Schwartz (1975) and Civille and Dus (1991) for skincare products, McDaniel et al. (1987)
for wines, Meilgaard and Muller (1987) for beer, Lyon (1987) for chicken, Johnsen et al.
(1988) for peanuts, Johnsen and Civille (1986) for beef, and Johnsen, Civille, and Vercellotti
(1987) for catﬁsh. Typically, the ﬁrst stage of training may require 15–20 h as panelists
begin to develop an understanding of the broad array of descriptors that fall into the
category being studied (appearance, ﬂavor, oral texture, etc.). This ﬁrst phase is designed
to provide them with a ﬁrm background in the underlying modality and for them to begin
to perceive the different characteristics as they are manifest in different product types.
9.4.3.2
Introduction to Descriptive Scaling
The scaling method of choice may be introduced during the ﬁrst 10–20 h of training. By
using a set of products or references that represent three to ﬁve different levels of each
attribute, the panel leader reinforces both the sensory characteristic and the scaling
method by demonstrating different levels or intensities across several attributes.
Appendix 11.2 provides examples of different intensity levels of several sensory attributes
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 9
152
