† Panel protocol includes site preparation, minimal talking, organized work space,
awareness to detail, etc.
† Data validity will be determined during client studies and validation studies.
† Data reliability is very important.
Note: Panelists are measured and documented on their performance in evaluating the
attributes required to review Skinfeel products. Nonperforming panelists do not receive a
bonus and are subject to review and reorientation without pay.
Ballot Completeness
† Ballots will be checked for completeness before turning them in to the
panel leader.
† Ballot completeness includes name, panel ID number, sample code, all attribute
scores, etc. Data should be proofed by a panelist partner.
† Data cannot be reconstructed after the fact. Missing data cannot be used and may
cause a study to have to be conducted again at the expense of Company L and
the panel.
† If a study needs to be conducted again due to incomplete ballots, those panelists
who had incomplete ballots will not be paid to repeat the study.
Validation
† Validation studies are used to document the panelists’ mean and standard
deviations in relationship to the panel as a whole and individually by panelists.
† This includes measuring the reliability of sample repetition by panelists.
† These studies are conducted for all areas of skinfeel and odor evaluations
including lotions, liquid soap, bar soaps, etc.
† The results are used to document the integrity of the panel and are provided to
our clients as requested.
Study Design
† Studies will use a panel pool composed of available panelists.
† A minimum of 10 (ten) panelists is needed for each study. Panels greater than 10
are encouraged.
† All panelists are expected to attend practice sessions.
† Panelists must be able to attend all sessions to be eligible for a given study.
Talk
† Discussions within panel room are limited to those directed by the panel leader.
† Panelists need to concentrate on their evaluations. Talking distracts other pane-
lists from the task at hand leaving opportunities to make mistakes and to forget
to record data points.
† In between evaluations, panelists are welcome to bring reading material or
quiet work.
† Some studies may not allow free time to spend doing other things other than
waiting to complete the next time evaluation.
Selection and Training of Panel Members: Panel Leadership Advice
169
