The addition of the squared and cross-product terms in the model allows the predicted
response surface to “bend” and “ﬂex,” resulting in an improved prediction of
complex relationships.
A popular class of second-order RSM experiments is the central-composite, rotatable
treatment structures. Central-composite experiments are developed by adding a set of
axial or “star” points to a ﬁrst-order RSM treatment structure (see Figure 14.29). There
are 2k axial points in a k-factor RSM experiment. Using the normal K1, 0, C1 coding for
the factor levels, the axial points are (Ga, 0,., 0), (0, Ga, 0, ., 0), ., (0, 0, ., 0, Ga),
where a is the distance from the axial point to the center of the experimental region (i.e.,
the center point). The value of a is (F)1/4, where F is the number of noncenter factorial
points in the ﬁrst-order experiment. For example, in a two-factor experiment, FZ4 and aZ
(4)1/4Z1.414.
Second-order RSM models have several advantages over ﬁrst-order models. As
mentioned before, the second-order models are better able to ﬁt complex relationships
between the dependent variable and the independent variables. In addition, second-order
models can be used to locate the predicted maximum or minimum value of a response in
terms of the levels of the independent variables.
The recommended procedure for performing an RSM experiment is as follows (also see
Carr 1989): First, the experimental samples should be prepared according to the RSM plan.
Second, perform a regular BIB analysis of the samples from the RSM treatment structure,
ignoring the association among the samples. (The BIB blocking structure is suggested
because there are normally too many samples in an RSM experiment to evaluate at one
sitting. If, however, it is possible to evaluate all of the samples together, then a randomized
[complete] block design can be used.) The only output of interest from the BIB analysis is
the set of adjusted sample means. The signiﬁcance (or lack of signiﬁcance) of the overall
test statistic is of no interest. Next, submit the sample means to a stepwise regression
analysis to develop the predictive equation that relates the value of the response to the
levels of the experimental factors. The predictive equation is then used to generate a
contour plot that provides a graphical depiction of the effects of the factors on the
response. If there is only one response, the region where the response takes on acceptable
values (or attains a minimum or maximum value) is apparent in the contour plot.
(–1,+1)
(–1,–1)
(+1,–1)
(+1,+1)
(0,+a)
(0,–a)
(+a,0)
(–a,0)
(0,0)
FIGURE 14.29
Central composite RSM experiments. The ﬁgures illustrate the arrangement of the factorial, axial, and center
points in an RSM experiment with two and three independent variables that permit estimation of a second-order
regression model as in Equation 14.15.
Advanced Statistical Methods
403
