BIB designs that can be used in most test situations. Computer programs, such as Design
Express (2003), also can be used to generate BIB designs.
7.5
Simple Ranking Test: Friedman Analysis—Randomized
(Complete) Block Design
7.5.1
Scope and Application
Use this method when the test objective is to compare several samples according to
a single attribute, e.g., sweetness, freshness, preference. Ranking is the simplest way to
perform such comparisons, but the data are merely ordinal, and no measure of the degree
of difference is obtained from each respondent. Consecutive samples that differ widely, as
well as those that differ slightly, will be separated by one rank unit. A good, detailed
discussion of the virtues and limitations of rank data is given by Pangborn (1984).
Ranking is less time-consuming than other methods and is particularly useful when
samples are to be presorted or screened for later analysis.
7.5.2
Principle of the Test
Present the set of samples to each subject in balanced, random order. Ask subjects to rank
them according to the attribute of interest. Calculate the rank sums and evaluate them
statistically with the aid of Friedman’s test, as described in Chapter 13, p. 342.
7.5.3
Test Subjects
Select, train, and instruct the subjects as described on p. 66. Use no fewer than 8 subjects;
discrimination is much improved if 16 or more can be used. Subjects may require special
instruction or training to enable them to recognize the attribute of interest reproducibly
(see Chapter 9, p. 144). Depending on the test objective, subjects may be selected on the
basis of proven ability to detect small differences in the attribute.
7.5.4
Test Procedure
For test controls and product controls, see pp. 25 and 34. Offer samples simultaneously if
possible, or else sequentially. The subject receives the set of t samples in balanced random
order; the task is to rearrange them in rank order. The set may be presented once or several
times with different coding. Accuracy is much improved if the set can be presented two or
more times. In preference tests, instruct subjects to assign rank 1 to the preferred sample,
rank 2 to the next preferred, etc. For intensity tests, instruct subjects to assign rank 1 to the
lowest intensity, rank 2 to the next lowest, etc.
Recommend that subjects arrange the samples in a provisional order based upon a ﬁrst
trial of each and then verify or change the order based on further testing. Instruct subjects
to make a “best guess” about adjacent samples, even if they appear to be the same;
however, if a subject declines to guess, he or she should indicate under “comments” the
samples considered identical. Assign the average rank to each of the identical samples for
statistical analysis. For example, in a four-sample test, if a panelist cannot differentiate the
two middle samples, assign the average rank of 2.5 to each, i.e., (2C3)/2.
If a rank order for more than one attribute of the same set of samples is needed, carry out
the procedure separately for each attribute, using new samples coded differently so that
Attribute Difference Tests: Simple Ranking Test
113
