9.2.3
Data Collection and Handling
This is another resource to be deﬁned: The personnel, hardware, and software required to
collect and treat the data generated by the panel. Topics such as the use of personal compu-
ters with PC software vs. the company server should be addressed before the data begin to
accumulate on the sensory analyst’s desk. The speciﬁc ways in which the data are generated
and used (that is, frequency data, scalar data—category, linear, magnitude estimation), the
number of attributes, the number of replications, and the need for statistical analysis all
contribute to the requirements for data collection and handling.
9.2.4
Projected Costs
After upper management and the project group understand the need to have a panel and
the time and costs required for its development and use, the costs and beneﬁts can be
assessed from a business and investment perspective. This phase is essential so that the
support from management is based on a full understanding of the panel development
process. After management and the project team are “on board,” the sensory analyst can
expect the support that is needed to satisfy the requirements for personnel (both panelists
and staff), facilities, and data handling. Management can then, through circulars, letters,
and/or seminars, communicate its support for the development of and participation in
sensory testing. As the reader will have gathered by now, public recognition by manage-
ment of the importance of the sensory program and of the involvement of employees as
panelists are essential for the operation of the system. If participation in sensory tests is not
seen by upper and middle management as a worthwhile expenditure of time, the sensory
analyst will ﬁnd the recruiting task to be difﬁcult, if not impossible, and test participation
will dry up more quickly than new recruits can be enrolled.
After management support has been communicated through the organization and has
been demonstrated in terms of facilities and personnel for the panel, the sensory analyst
can use presentations, questionnaires, and personal contacts to reach potential panel
members. The time commitment and qualiﬁcations must be clearly iterated so that candi-
dates understand what is required of them. General requirements include: Interest in the
test program, availability (about 80% of the time), promptness, and general good health
(no allergies or health problems affecting participation), articulateness, and absence of
aversions to the product class involved. Other speciﬁc criteria are listed for individual
tasks in Section 9.3 and Section 9.4.
9.3
Selection and Training for Difference Tests
9.3.1
Selection
Assume that the early recruitment procedure has provided a group of candidates free of
obvious drawbacks, such as heavy travel or work schedules, or health problems that
would make participation impossible or sporadic. The sensory analyst must now devise
a set of screening tests that teach the candidates the test process while weeding out
unsuitable nondiscriminators as early as possible. Such screening tests should use
the products to be studied and the sensory methods to be used in the study. It follows
that they should be patterned on those described below, rather than using them
directly. The screening tests aim to determine differences among candidates in the
ability to: (1) discriminate (and describe, if attribute difference tests are to be used)
character differences among products, and (2) discriminate (and describe with a scale
for attribute difference tests) differences in the intensity or strength of the characteristic.
Selection and Training of Panel Members: Difference Tests
143
