from left to right and select the odd sample. Count the number of correct replies and refer
to Table 17.8* for interpretation.
6.3.3
Test Subjects
Generally, 20–40 subjects are used for triangle tests, although as few as 12 may be
employed when differences are large and easy to identify. Similarity testing, on the
other hand, requires 50–100 subjects. At a minimum, subjects should be familiar with
the triangle test (the format, the task, the procedure for evaluation), and with the
product being tested, especially because ﬂavor memory plays a part in triangle testing.
An orientation session is recommended prior to the actual taste test to familiarize
subjects with the test procedures and product characteristics. Care must be taken to
supply sufﬁcient information to be instructive and motivating, while not biasing subjects
with speciﬁc information about treatment effects and product identity.
6.3.4
Test Procedure
The test controls (explained in detail in Chapter 3) should include a partitioned test area in
which each subject can work independently. Control of lighting may be necessary to
reduce any color variables. Prepare and present samples under optimum conditions for
the product type investigated, e.g., samples should be appetizing and well presented.
Offer samples simultaneously, if possible; however, samples that are bulky, leave an
aftertaste, or show slight differences in appearance may be offered sequentially without
invalidating the test.
Prepare equal numbers of the six possible combinations (ABB, BAA, AAB, BBA, ABA,
and BAB) and present these at random to the subjects. Ask subjects to examine (taste, feel,
smell, etc.) the samples in order from left to right, with the option of going back to repeat
the evaluation of each while the test is in progress.
The scoresheet, shown in Figure 6.1, could provide for more than one set of samples.
However, this can only be done if sensory fatigue is minimal. Do not ask questions about
preference, acceptance, degree of difference, or type of difference after the initial selection
of the odd sample. This is because the subject’s choice of the odd sample may bias his/her
responses to these additional questions. Responses to such questions may be obtained
through additional tests. See Chapter 12 for preference and acceptance tests and Chapter 7
for difference tests related to size or type (attribute) of difference.
6.3.5
Analysis and Interpretation of Results
Count the number of correct responses (correctly identiﬁed odd samples) and the number
of total responses. Determine if the number correct for the number tested is equal to or
larger than the number indicated in Table 17.8.
Do not count “no difference” replies as valid responses. Instruct subjects to guess if the
odd sample is not detectable.
Example 6.1: Triangle Difference Test—New Malt Supply
A test beer “B” is brewed using a new lot of malt, and the sensory analyst wishes to know
if it can be distinguished from control beer “A” taken from current production. A 5% risk
of error is accepted and 12 trained assessors are available; 18 glasses of “A” and 18 glasses
* See the ﬁnal chapter of the book, “Statistical Tables.” Tables are numbered Table 17.1 through Table 17.14.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 6
66
