1
Introduction to Sensory Techniques
1.1
Introduction
This introduction is in three parts. The ﬁrst part lists some reasons why sensory tests are
performed and brieﬂy traces the history of their development. The second part introduces
the basic approach of modern sensory analysis, which is to treat the panelists as measuring
instruments. As such, they are highly variable and very prone to bias, but they are the only
instruments that will measure what needs to be measured; therefore, the variability must
be minimizes and the bias must be controlled by making full use of the best existing
techniques in psychology and psychophysics. In the third part, a demonstration is
provided of how these techniques are applied with the aid of seven practical steps.
1.2
Development of Sensory Testing
Sensory tests, of course, have been conducted for as long as there have been human beings
evaluating the goodness and badness of food, water, weapons, shelters, and everything
else that can be used and consumed.
The rise of trading inspired slightly more formal sensory testing. A buyer, hoping that a
part would represent the whole, would test a small sample of a shipload. Sellers began to
set their prices on the basis of an assessment of the quality of goods. With time, ritualistic
schemes of grading wine, tea, coffee, butter, ﬁsh, and meat developed, some of which
survive to this day.
Grading gave rise to the professional taster and consultant to the budding industries of
foods, beverages, and cosmetics in the early 1900s. A literature developed that used the
term “organoleptic testing” (Pfenninger 1979) to denote supposedly objective measure-
ment of sensory attributes. In reality, tests were often subjective, tasters too few, and
interpretations open to prejudice.
Pangborn (1964) traces the history of systematic “sensory” analysis that is based on
wartime efforts of providing acceptable food to American forces (Dove 1946, 1947) and
on the development of the triangle test in Scandinavia (Bengtsson and Helm 1946; Helm
and Trolle 1946). A major role in the development of sensory testing was played by the
Food Science Department at the University of California at Davis, resulting in the book by
Amerine, Pangborn, and Roessler (1965).
Scientists have only recently developed sensory testing as a formalized, structured, and
codiﬁed methodology, and they continue to develop new methods and reﬁne existing
ones. The current state of sensory techniques is recorded in the dedicated journals Chemical
1
