Figure 3.3 shows a typical booth that is 27- to 32-in. wide with an 18- to 22-in. deep
counter installed at the same height as the sample preparation table (normally 36 in.).
Space can be allowed for installation of a PC monitor and a keyboard, if required. The
dividers should extend approximately 18 in. above the countertop to reduce visual and
auditory distraction between booths. The dividers may extend from the ﬂoor to the
ceiling/sofﬁt for complete privacy (with the design allowing for adequate ventilation
and/or cleaning), or it may be suspended from the wall enclosing only the torso and
head of the assessor. The latter is preferred in most cases, as claustrophobia is a permanent
problem whereas assessors soon learn to refrain from looking over shoulders or uttering
loud comments on the quality of samples. A minimum free distance of 4 ft is re-
commended as a corridor to allow easy access to the booths.
Special booth features. A small stainless steel sink and a water faucet are usually included
for rinsing. These are mandatory for evaluation of such products as mouthwashes, tooth-
pastes, and household items, but are not recommended for solid foods that may plug the
traps. Filtered water may be required if odor-free tap water is unavailable.
A signal system is sometimes included so that the panel supervisor knows when an
assessor is ready for a sample or has a question. Usually this takes the form of a switch in
each booth that will trigger a signal light for that booth in the sample preparation area. It
may include an exterior light panel that indicates to incoming subjects those booths that
are available.
A direct computer entry system located in each panel booth (Malek, Schmitt, and
Munroe 1982) requires a 32-in. width to accommodate the entry device (keypad, tablet
digitizer, CRT terminal).
Sample trays may be carried to each booth if they consist of nonodorous items that will
keep their condition for 10–20 min. If these conditions are not fulﬁlled, the sample
FIGURE 3.3
Sensory evaluation booth with hatch (in
background) for receipt and return of
sample tray: (1) tap water; (2) small
sink; (3) electrical outlet and signal
switch to panel attendant; (4) table
covered with odorless Formica or other
easy-to-clean surface.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 3
28
