judges the relative difference in acceptability or preference of a test sample, vis-a`-vis the
well-known standard or control.
Employee acceptance tests can be a valuable resource when used correctly and when
limited to maintenance situations. Because of their familiarity with the product and with
testing, employees can handle more samples at one time and provide better discrimi-
nation, faster replies, and cheaper service. Employee acceptance tests can be carried out
in a laboratory, in the style of a central location test, or the employees may take the
product home.
However, for new-product development, product optimization, or product improve-
ment, employees or local residents should not be used to represent the consumer. The
following are some examples of biases that may result from conducting affective tests
with employees:
1. Employees tend to ﬁnd reasons to prefer the products that they and their fellow
employees helped to make, or if morale is bad, ﬁnd reasons to reject such products.
It is therefore imperative that products be disguised. If this is not possible, a
consumer panel must be used.
2. Employees may be unable to weight desirable characteristics against undesirable
ones in the same manner as a consumer. For example, employees may know that a
recent change was made in the process to produce a paler color, and this will make
them prefer the paler product and give too little weight to other characteristics.
Again, in such a case the color must be disguised, or if this is not possible, outside
testing must be used.
3. Where a company makes separate products for different markets, outside tests
will be distributed to the target population, but this cannot be done with
employees. If required to test with employees, it is suggested to tell them that
the product is destined for X market, but sometimes this cannot be done
without violating the requirement that the test be blind. If so, outside testing
must be used.
12.2.2.2
Local Area Residents
One approach to recruiting respondents for consumer testing is for a company to develop
their own database of local area residents. This approach, although relatively cost effective,
requires internal support to develop, maintain, and recruit respondents to participate after
it is established. Caution must be taken not to overuse the consumers in the database. It
may be difﬁcult to maintain conﬁdentiality, especially if the test facilities are onsite. Deter-
mining when and at which stage of a project the consumer database can be used is
important to insure information collected is appropriate to the project objective.
In summary, the test organizer must plan the test imaginatively and must be aware of all
sources of bias. In addition, the validity of responses must be assured by frequent
comparisons with consumer tests that use the broader consumer population on the
same samples. In this way, the organizer and the employee panel members slowly
develop knowledge of what the market requires; this, subsequently, makes it easier to
gauge the pitfalls and avoid them.
12.2.2.3
General Population
Testing from the general population typically captures the responses from the target user
group by going into the ﬁeld and recruiting consumers who meet speciﬁc predeﬁned
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 12
262
