Graphs can be used to illustrate interactions. Figure 14.23a illustrates the interaction
between boiling time and variety. The points on the graph are the average hop aroma
ratings of the four experimental conditions presented in Table 14.6. The interaction
between the two factors is indicated by the lack of parallelism between the two lines. If
there were no interaction between the two factors, the lines would be nearly parallel
(deviating only due to experimental error) as in Figure 14.23b. Researchers must be
very cautious in interpreting main effects in the presence of interactions. Consider the
data in Table 14.6 that illustrates the “boiling time by hop variety” interaction. Applying
Equation 14.12 yields an estimated main effect due to boiling time of (6K12)C(13K7)/2Z0,
which indicates that boiling time has no effect. However, Figure 14.23a clearly shows that
for each variety of hops there is a substantial effect due to boiling time. Because the
separate variety effects are opposite, they cancel each other in calculating the main effect
due to boiling time. In the presence of an interaction, the effect of one factor can only be
meaningfully studied by holding the level of the second factor ﬁxed.
Researchers sometimes use an alternative to factorial treatment structures, called one-
at-a-time treatment structures, in the false belief that they are economizing the study.
Suppose in the beer brewing example that the brewer had only prepared three samples:
the low boiling time/variety A point T1A, the low boiling time/variety B point T1B, and the
high boiling time variety B point T2B. (The high boiling time/variety A treatment com-
bination T2A is omitted.) Because only three samples are prepared, it would appear that
the one-at-a-time approach is more economical than the full factorial approach. This is not
true, however, if one considers the precision of the estimates of the main effects. Only one
difference due to boiling time is available to estimate the main effect of boiling time in the
one-at-a-time study (i.e., T1B–T2B). The same is true for the variety effect (i.e., T1A–T2B).
Equation 14.12 and Equation 14.13 show that, for the factorial treatment structure, two
differences are available for estimating each effect. The entire one-at-a-time experiment
would have to be replicated twice, yielding six experimental points, to obtain estimates of
the main effects that are as precise as those obtained from the four points in the
factorial experiment.
Another advantage that factorial treatment structures have over one-at-a-time experi-
ments is the ability to detect interactions. If the high-temperature/variety A observation
T2AZ12 were omitted from the data in Table 14.6 (as in the one-at-a-time study), one
would observe that beer brewed at the high boiling time has less hop aroma than beer
brewed at the low boiling time and that beer brewed with hop variety A has less hop
aroma than beer brewed with hop variety B. The most obvious conclusion would be that
beer brewed at the high boiling time using hop variety A would have the least hop aroma
15
10
5
0
15
10
5
0
Low
High
Low
High
Hop aroma
Hop aroma
Boiling time
Interaction
Boiling time
No interaction
A
B
A
B
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 14.23
Plots of the mean hop aroma response illustrating (a) interaction and (b) no interaction between the factors in
the study.
Advanced Statistical Methods
395
