be deﬁned and redeﬁned several times before an acceptable design emerges. Sensory tests
are expensive, and they often give results that cannot be clearly understood. If this
happens, the design may be faulty. Pilot tests are often useful as a means of reﬁning a
design. It would, for example, be meaningless to carry out a consumer preference test with
hundreds of participants without ﬁrst having shown that a perceptible difference exists;
the latter can be established with 10 or 20 tasters, using a difference test. In another
example, islands of opposing preference may exist, invalidating a normal preference
test; here, the solution may be a pilot study in which various types of customers receive
single-sample acceptability tests.
Reference
IFT. 1981. “Guidelines for the preparation and review of papers reporting sensory evaluation data,”
Food Technology, 35:11, 50.
TABLE 15.5
Area of Application of Descriptive Tests
Tests
Areas of Application
1. Flavor proﬁle
(Arthur D. Little)
In situations where many and varied samples must be judged by a few
highly trained tasters
2. Texture proﬁle
(General Foods)
In situations where many and varied samples must be judged for texture
by a few highly trained tasters
3. QDAw method
(Tragon Corp.)
In situations such as quality assurance in a large company, where large
numbers of the same kind of products must be judged day in and day
out by a well-trained panel; in product development in situations
where reproducibility over time and place is not required
4. Time–intensity
descriptive analysis
Useful for samples in which the perceived intensity of ﬂavor varies over
time after the product is taken into the mouth, e.g., bitterness of beer,
sweetness of artiﬁcial sweeteners
5. Free-choice proﬁling
In consumer testing, when it is desirable not to teach the subjects a
common scale
6. Spectrum method
A custom-design system suitable for most applications, including those
under tests 1–3; suitable where reproducibility over time and place is
needed
7. Modiﬁed, short-
version Spectrum
Descriptive Analysis
To monitor a few critical attributes of a product through shelf-life
studies; to examine possible manufacturing defects and product
complaints; for routine quality assurance
Descriptive tests are very diverse, often designed or modiﬁed for each individual application, and therefore
difﬁcult to classify in a table such as this. A classiﬁcation by inventor is perhaps the most helpful.
Sensory Evaluation Techniques, 4th Ed., Ch. 15
412
